Income Tax Appellate Tribunal - NagpurBeohar Singh Raghubir Singh vs Commissioner Of Income-Tax U. P., ... on 4 September, 1946Equivalent citations: 1948 16 ITR 433 NagJUDGMENT This judgment will govern miscellaneous Civil Case No. 63 of 1944 and MiscellaneousCivil Cases Nos. 7, 8, 85, 91, 92 and 98 of 1945. The questions they raise are not common to all,except as regards one question, but as the others are inter linked between them it will be convenientto group the cases according to the questions referred and deal with all in one judgment.These cases are all income-tax references made under Section 66 (1) of the Income-tax Act, asamended in 1939. In view of the contentions made before us, we think it desirable to set out thelimits of our authority at the outset. It is important to emphasise that we are not a court of Appealand accordingly are not free to debate such questions as might seem to us to arise in the case,however important they may appear to be. We are only an advisory body which is not free to tenderunsolicited advice. We can only an advisory body which is not free to tender unsolicited advice. Wecan only advise on the questions referred and accordingly will have to confine our answers to thequestions asked. We have certain other powers, and indeed it will be necessary to exercise them inone of the cases heard along with these (we shall deal separately with that), but these powers onlyenable us to send the matter back and compel a reference. Until that is done, we have no power todebate questions which have not been referred. This is clear from the Act, but the matter has beenplaced beyond controversy by their Lordships of the Privy Council in Commissioner of Income-tax,Bihar & Orissa v. Kameshwar Singh of Darbhanga Rajendra Narayan v. Commissioner ofIncome-tax, Bihar & Orissa, Trustees Corporation (India) Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income-tax,Bombay and National Mutual Life Association of Australasia Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income-tax,Bombay Presidency & Aden. It has also been so decided by this Court in Income-tax AppellateTribunal, Bombay v. Managing Trustee, Shri Radha Madho Trust, Saugor.The question which concerns all the cases has been referred in these terms in Miscellaneous CivilCase No. 63 of 1944 :-"Whether, in the circumstances of this case, the income of Rs. 10,835 derived from the sale of forestproduce is agricultural income exempt from taxation under Section 4 (3) (viii) of the Income-taxAct."The point is the same in the other cases though in some of them the language is a little different, andnaturally the figure differs in each case.The question is one of mixed fact and law. So far as the facts are concerned they will be foundseparately in each case. So far as the law goes it will be necessary to search for some general andclear cut principle, because opinions have differed, and in the absence of principle, opinion tends tobe arbitrary.The definition given in the Act is that "agricultural Income" means :-Beohar Singh Raghubir Singh vs Commissioner Of Income-Tax U. P., ... on 4 September, 1946Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86313/1"(a) any rent or revenue derived from land which is used for agricultural purposes, and is eitherassessed to land revenue in British India or subject to a local rate assessed and collected by officersof the Crown as such; (b) any income derived from such land by (i) agriculture."Clause (b) throws us back to clause (a) because of words "such land" which refer to the landdescribed there. It is land which is (1) used for agricultural purposes and (2) either assessed to landrevenue in British India or subject to a local rate assessed and collected by officers of the Crown assuch.It is admitted that the land in all these cases is either assessed to land revenue or is subject to a localrate assessed and collected by officers of the Crown as such, and that, therefore to that extent, theincome complies with the definition. But that is not enough, for, it must also either be used foragricultural purposes or for agriculture. The question, therefore, is how far does agriculture coverforests ? Opinions differ regarding this, and because of that the learned Acting Advocate-Generalsuggested that it will be pertinent to go back to first principles and analyse the root of the word.The dictionaries tell us that agriculture comes from ager, a field, and culture, cultivation. Thisimplies the use of human skill and labour; and that is exactly how the dictionaries define it. Webster,for instance, says that agriculture is the "art or science of cultivating the ground", and includes in itthe rearing and management of livestock, husbandry, farming, and so forth. Other dictionaries,including the Oxford English Dictionary, employ the same basic conception. Some include "forestry"in the term. It is to be observed, however, that the word used when forestry is included, is forestryand not forests. The distinction is important because when one turns to the definition of forestry inthe dictionaries one finds that is also an art of a science. Thus, Webster says it is "the art of farmingor cultivating forests; the management of growing timber", and the Oxford English Dictionary saysmuch the same thing, therefore, throughout we find that the essence of agriculture, even when it isextended to include "forestry", is the application of human skill and labour. Without that it can beneither art nor a science. And that we feel must be the determining factor in this class of case.Turning next to the cases, one of the most importants is the Federal court judgment in Meghraj v.Allah Rakhia not because it deals directly with this question, though it touches an allied matter, butbecause it lays down certain general principles which bind us, and clears much of the ground.The learned Judges were dealing with the expression "agricultural land" in the Constitution Act, andafter pointing out that it had not been defined there said at page 61 : "It must accordingly beunderstood in the sense which it ordinarily bears in the English language", and again at page 62 :"As regards the connotation of the word agricultural, it may be pointed out that agriculture has beenvariously defined in several English and Indian status for the purposes of these statutes and it isneither useful nor legitimate to attempt to draw any inference from these statutory definitions forthe purpose of determining the ordinary connotation of the word in the English language." Theythen referred to decisions in which the Court has placed a restricted meaning on the terms "in viewof the indication afforded by the particular Act which had to be considered by the Court," and toothers which construed the term in a more general sense. The sum and substance of it all is that it isof little avail to consider these decisions because of course, it is open to the legislature to widen or toBeohar Singh Raghubir Singh vs Commissioner Of Income-Tax U. P., ... on 4 September, 1946Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86313/2restrict the ordinary meaning of a word, and because, if it chooses to do so for the purposes of aparticular Act, it does not follow that the same result is intended in another Act framed for adifferent purpose, having different provisions and using other language. In the face of that we do notthink it will be either profitable or proper to consider in detail the various decisions which construethe term or analogous expressions, for the purpose of some particular Act. Some of them have beenreferred to in the Federal Courts judgment at pages 62-65, and others will be found in decisions likeProvince of Bihar v. Pratap Udai Nath Sahi Deo and Chandrasekhara Bharathi v. Duraisami Naidu Itwill suffice to say that the following cases related to special Act, and at least part of the decisions ineach is based upon matters special to those Acts : Venkayya v. Ramasomi Murugesa Chetti v. ChinnaThambi Goundan, Chandrasekhara Bharathi v. Duraisami Naidu, Kesho Prasad v. Sheo PargashOjha, Kesho Prasad v. Sheo Pargash Ojha, Hiralal Ravchand v. Parbhulal Sakhidas, Kaju Mal v. SaligRam and Imam Ali v. Priyawati Devi. The other cases in this class, though dealing with special Acts,base the decision on general grounds and to that extent are more in point. But all they serve to showis that difference of opinion is possible, the meaning being extended in some cases and restricted inothers. Thus, Panadai Pathan v. Ramasami Chetty holds that the growing of casuarina trees for fuelis an agricultural purpose and Hiralal Ravchand v. Parbhulal Sakhidas discards what we might termthe human agency test and employees instead one which determines whether the income is derivedfrom the produce of the land and not what is the actual quantum of labour bestowed on it. Of thesetwo the former is largely based on considerations which the Federal Court state are irrelevant,namely, the meaning of the term in certain English Acts where special statutory definitions aregiven. With the latter we do not, with respect, agree.As to the other cases, the Federal Court state that the view taken in Murugesa Chetti v. ChinnaThambi Goundan, Venkayya v. Ramasami and Panadai Pathan v. Ramasami Chetty has not goneunchallenged and the learned judges refer to Chandrasekhara Bharathi v. Duraisami Naidu. So alsothey state that the decision of the Judicial Committee in Kesho Prasad v. Sheo Pargash Ojha,upholding Kesho Prasad v. Sheo Pargash Ojha, lays down no principle or test of general application.They are accordingly not of much value for the present purpose. The only decisions in this classwhich, in our opinion, lay down general rules are best referred to in the language of the FederalCourt in Meghraj v. Allah Rakhia :-"Their Lordships confirmed a decision of the Punjab Chief Court to the effect that land used as a teagarden was used for agricultural purposes. In the judgment of the Chief Court (which was generallyapproved by their Lordships) it was observed that the term agricultural land" is used in the Act of1905 in its widest sense to denote all land which is ..... The Chief Court had held that land covered bya natural forest was not agricultural land, and this view also would seem to have been confirmed bythe Judicial Committee."We have underlined the word "tilled" because, in our opinion, that brings out the distinction whichwe have sought to draw between an agricultural and a non-agricultural purpose. The decisionsreferred to are Kaju Mal v. Saligram. and Kaju Mal v. Saligram.From here we proceed to consider cases under the Income-tax Act. A large number were cited butthose dealing with forests are not many. Of them Chief Commissioner of Income-tax v. Zamindar ofBeohar Singh Raghubir Singh vs Commissioner Of Income-Tax U. P., ... on 4 September, 1946Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86313/3Singampatti. thought, without deciding the point, that "forestry" might be regarded as agriculture.We stress, however, the use of the word "forestry" as opposed to "forest".Emperor v. Probhat Chandra held that income derived from pasturage was agricultural income butnot that from fisheries or from land leased for stacking timber. The "pasturage" part of the decisionwould, at first sight, appear to offend the rule we have suggested but the point was not decidedbecause it was not contested once the case reached the High Court (see page 527). But that apart,nearly every rule has its exceptions and the pasturing of cattle is so closely allied to agriculture thatit has become to be considered part and parcel of it and the meaning of the term is now so wellestablished that there is no longer room for doubt. That, however, does not apply to forests or evento forestry, though we think it possible that the latter might fall within the scope of the definition.Commissioner of Income-tax, Madras v. Manavedan Tirumalpad holds that income fromunassessed forest land is not agricultural income and unassessed forest land is not agriculturalincome and Province of Bihar v. Pratap Udai Nath Sahi Deo applies the same rule to uncultivatedforest land, as also does Maharaja of Kapurthala v. Commissioner of Income-tax, Central andUnited Provinces, Special Manager, Court of Wards v. Commissioner of Income-tax, U. P. & C. P.Mustafa Ali Khan v. Commissioner of Income-tax, U. P. & C. P. and Nawazish Ali Khan v. MustafaAli Khan v. Commissioner of Income-tax, U. P. & C. P.This resume will show that so far as forests are concerned the definition we have adopted makingactual cultivation with the aid of human skill and labour the dividing line, reconciles, as far as wecan see, the various cases which have been cited on the matter of forests.The other cases cited to us are not in point and do not help because they deal with other matters,such as dairy farming, Commissioner of Income-tax, Burma v. Kokine Dairy, Rangoon, allowancesfrom a zemindari to a Rani, Commissioner of Income-tax, Central and United Provinces v. RaniSaltanat Begam, a money-lender who cultivates a field in lieu of a debt due to him, ChellappaChettiar v. Commissioner of Income-tax, and royalties from a coal mine, Kamakshya Narayan Singhv. Commissioner of Income-tax Bihar & Orissa. All we need say with respect to them, excluding ofcourse the judgment of the Privy Council, is that in so far as their more general observations agreewith the distinction we make, they support us, and in so far as they do not, then, with great respect,we differ from them. Their Lordships held that royalties from local mines were not agriculturalincome and nothing that their Lordships said detracts from our view.It will be necessary, however, for us to meet certain arguments. It was suggested in some of the casesthat object of exempting agricultural income from tax was that it already pays tax in another form,namely land revenue or ceases, and therefore, the idea is to avoid double taxation. This view will befound advanced in, for instance Chief Commissioner of Income-tax v. Zamindar of Singampatti. Butwe think it is sufficiently met in Maharaja of Kapurthala v. Commissioner of Income-tax, Centraland United Provinces. The learned judges point out there that the fact that the Act requires theincome not only to be subject to land revenue or ceases but also to be derived from agriculture orfrom land used for agricultural purposes shows that incomes from other types of land are notexempt even though they pay land revenue. And that of course is patent. Rents derived fromBeohar Singh Raghubir Singh vs Commissioner Of Income-Tax U. P., ... on 4 September, 1946Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86313/4bungalows on malik makbuza land in a town are already taxable. Nor indeed is there any reason whythere should not be double taxation if the legislature chooses to impose it. That is also dealt with inthe Oudh case. The argument is also met by what their Lordships of the Privy Council say inProbhatchandra Barua v. Emperor. Their Lordships point out that in such cases the land revenue orceases paid are deducted from the gross receipts because the tax is not levied on gross receipts buton income. In practice, therefore, there is no double taxation.It was also argued that this income is not taxable at all because section 6 of the Act sets out the onlysources of taxable income. It cannot fall under the head "income from property" because Section 9defines that and there is no room for forest produce there. So also Section 10 sets out what is toconstitute "profits and gains of business, profession or vocation." That also excludes income fromforests. And as regards "other sources", it was contended that this must be read ejusdem generiswith what precedes it. It was said an important head of income such as the present could hardlyhave been left for inclusion under a general section. It was pointed out that forests cover a largesection of India and, therefore, assume more than ordinary importance in this country.That may be so, but the same applies to agriculture, and Sections 4 (3) (viii) and 2 (1) (a) and (b)would be otiose of agricultural income is exempt in any way. The fact that it was necessary to includethese sections shows that income of this sort would be taxable but for the exemptions. But thisapart, the matter has now been set at rest by their Lordships of the Privy Council. InPrabhatchandra Barua v. Emperor at page 442 their Lordships say that the words appear to be"clear and emphatic, and expressly framed so as to make the sixth head mentioned in section 6describe a true residuary group embracing within it all sources of income, profits and gains providedthe Act applies to them, i.e., provided that they accrue or arise or are received in British India or aredeemed to accrue or arise or to be received in British India, as provided by Section 4 (1), and are notexempted by virtue of Section 4 (3)." In view of that it is not necessary to say anything further.Part of the argument on behalf of the assessees had reference to certain provisions in some of ourlocal Acts, such as the Land Revenue Act; but we do not consider that a proper approach whenconstruing an Act of the Central Legislature. Central Acts apply all over India while Provincial Actshave limited provincial application; also Acts touching the same topics can, and often do, differ fromProvince to Province. It would be impossible for us to conclude that the words in a Central Act haveone meaning in one Province and another in another. The same assessee might have forest in thisProvince as well as in other Provinces. The local Acts in each might differ. It would be impossible forus to hold that his income from forests is exempt here while taxable elsewhere because the samewords used in the Income Tax Act mean one thing in one place and another in another.It is pertinent here to quote the Privy Council in Srimathoo Moothoo Vijia RagoonadahKolandapuree Netchiar v. Dorasinga Tevar. The case is not in point but the observations arepertinent. At page 317 their Lordships say : "It is obvious that an enactment which is intended toapply to all the Courts in India, and which is also a modern enactment, ought to receive the sameconstruction in all those Courts, and that no inconsistent course of practice should be allowed tospring up in any of the presidencies"; and at page 320, "unless, therefore, etc........ we must come tothe absurd conclusion that the same words are to be interpreted by the High Court in one senseBeohar Singh Raghubir Singh vs Commissioner Of Income-Tax U. P., ... on 4 September, 1946Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86313/5when it is exercising its original jurisdiction or sitting on an appeal from a decree made under thatjurisdiction, and in a different sense when it is sitting on an appeal from a mofussil Court; andfurther that the legislature has by the same form of words intended to make one law for the mofussilCourts, and another for those of the Presidency towns."Another branch of this argument had relation to a possible conflict between the Provincial andFederal Legislative Lists in the Constitution Act unless the matter was decided in the way contendedfor by the assessees. But the basis of that argument is that agricultural income from land revenuepaying estates etc. cannot be taxed. No one questions that, and if the income from these forests isagricultural income then, of course, it cannot be taxed. The whole question is whether it is suchincome. The other phase of this argument was only a variation of what was argued before theFederal Court in Hulas Narain Singh v. Province of Bihar. It would be pointless to elaborate thisfurther.Attempts were made to induce us to consider passages in the report of the Select Committee whichdealt with the Indian Income-tax Bill. Central Provinces and Berar Sales of Motor Spirit andLubricants Taxation Act, 1938, In re was relied on. But that passage has been much misunderstoodand was explained by Gwyer, C.J., in Hindu Womens Rights to Property Act, 1937, In re. It is truethis was not done in the course of a judgment but was an interjection during the arguments, but thesubstance of what he said accords with what the Privy Council laid in H. M. Edward v.Attorney-General of Canada. Two other decisions of the Judicial Committee are also apposite :Administrator-General of Bengal v. Premlal and Krishna Ayyangar v. Nallaperumal Pillai.Mr. Mangalmurti stressed the difference between the words "any rent or revenue derived from landwhich is used for agricultural purposes" in section 2 (1) (a) and the words "any income derived fromsuch land by agriculture." He argued that the former was the wider and would include income fromany by-produce of the land and certainly income which came directly from the land. In ourjudgment the first clause refers to income derived from land which is used directly for agriculturalpurposes and the second to by-professes, such as the selling of milk, the pasturing of cattle etc.,provided the endeavour is agricultural and provided it is reasonably connected with land used foragricultural purposes. The distinction may be of importance in some cases, but here it still leaves theburden of deciding what "agriculture" means. As we have said whatever else may be necessary it isessential that the income should be derived from some activity which necessitates the employmentof human skill and labour and which is not merely a product of mans neglect or inaction except forthe gathering in of the spoils. Not only must be labour to reap the harvest - that of course he mustdo, else there could be no income - but he must also labour to produce it.An attempt was also made to get us to take into consideration the previous practice of thedepartment and the instructions embodied in the Income-tax Manual. This also is not permissible.It shows no more than that either certain officers of the department hold a certain view of the law, orthat it was considered expedient at that time, for this reason, or that, not to tax income of this kind.The Courts are here to interpret the law and what departmental officers thought is not relevant. Theargument is doubtless founded on certain observations of Lord Halsbury in Commissioners forSpecial purposes of Income-tax v. Pemsel but Lord Macnaghten said in the same case at page 591Beohar Singh Raghubir Singh vs Commissioner Of Income-Tax U. P., ... on 4 September, 1946Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86313/6that he would prefer not to express an opinion on the point. Also a later House of Lords case, Pate v.Pate, brushed aside the continuous interpretation which the Supreme Court of Ceylon had placed ona statute for 44 years. We do not think, therefore, that it will be proper to take those matters intoconsideration and so will exclude them.Having enumerated the general rule we will now proceed to examine the facts in each caseseparately and determine how far they conform to the rule we have enumerated.Miscellaneous Civil Case No. 63 of 1944. - The facts were agreed in this case. It appears from theorder of reference, as also from the decision of the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal in appeal, that theforest here was not a cultivated one and was of spontaneous growth. The same remarks apply to thefollowing items of produce, namely, harra nuts and mohua flowers. According to our definition, theyare not included within the exemption and so are liable to tax.As regards lac, it was held in Province of Bihar v. Pratap Udai Nath Sahi Deo that income from thissource is taxable. On the other hand, one of us (Bose, J.) held in Imam Ali v. Priyawati Devi that laccultivation is an agricultural operation. But the decision was based on the C. P. Tenancy Act and itwas made clear that that Act had extended the definition of agriculture. Accordingly, what Hiria v.Mohamed Sirajuddin Khan had held was not agriculture (namely lac cultivation) was considered tobe "agriculture" because of the extension of the definition in the later Act for the purposes of thatAct.Now, it is clear from Hiria v. Mohamed Sirajuddin Khan that "Lac is neither timber nor fruit. In thecase before me, it is not the produce of the tenants labour, but of his neglect and idleness. It is thedeposit of an insect upon the smaller branches of the palas trees." Again at page 110 Stanyon, A. J. C.says : "Such propagation can only be developed by allowing the land to lie waste so that the palastrees can spread over it as jungle. Therefore the produce of lac involves a use of the land in a mannerwhich is opposed to agriculture, as we understood that term in relation to village operations in thisprovince."In the circumstances we are of opinion that for the purposes of the Income-tax Act lac cultivationcannot be regarded as an agricultural operation. In any case it has not been shown that in this casethe conditions were otherwise than as described above.Our answer to the question referred in this case is that the Rs. 10,835 derived from the sale of forestproduce is not "agricultural income" and so is not exempt from taxation.Miscellaneous Civil Case No. 7 of 1945. - Here also the facts are agreed. The forest income is derivedfrom a sale of timber which the assessee cuts into beams, logs, poles etc.; also from the sale of tenduleaves which are used in the manufacture of bidis. The finding regarding the nature of the forest is tobe to found in the Tribunals appellate order and is given in these words :-"It is impossible that all these forest trees or tendu shrubs could have been planted or reared by anyprocess of agriculture, that is to say, by the cultivation of the soil. It may be that at some stage inBeohar Singh Raghubir Singh vs Commissioner Of Income-Tax U. P., ... on 4 September, 1946Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86313/7their growth the trees required to be watered or watched. But the fact is that they had been standingupon the land for a number of years during which the soil has remained untouched."The evidence adduced by the assessee to show that he had planted the trees was disbelieved. In thecircumstances, the burden being on the assessee to bring himself within the purview of theexemption, and he not having proved that the forest was "cultivated" by him in the sense that itsproduce was due to the skill and labour which he expended on it as opposed to produce which wouldcome in any way from natural cause despite inaction on his part, we are of opinion that the Rs.19,447 arising from those sources was rightly held to be taxable.Miscellaneous Civil Case No. 8 of 1945. - The forest income here was derived from leases of theforest "for the purpose of cutting and removing standing timber and fuel, and taking tendu leaves,lac and harra therefrom."The finding regarding the nature of the forest is to this effect : "The trees in these forest lands areobviously of spontaneous growth and must have been standing for a number of years. It isimpossible to say that they were either planted or reared up by any process of agriculture." We holdthat the Rs. 12,373 assessed to income under this head was rightly assessed.Miscellaneous Civil Case No. 85 of 1945. - In this case Rs. 1,799 received from the sale of harra andtendu leaves has been assessed. The Appellate Assistant Commissioner found here that the forestwas of spontaneous growth and that "nothing is done in the nature of preparing land for the growthof the trees therein." The Tribunal has accepted this and nothing has been shown us to the contrary.Accordingly, here also, we hold the income was rightly assessed.Miscellaneous Civil case No. 91 of 1945. - Here also the finding of the Tribunal is that the forest was"of a spontaneous growth and no process of agriculture was employed in growing the forest. It maybe that at one time forest guards may have been employed but that does not make it an agriculturalincome. Active human agency in tilling the soil was not employed nor any process which iscommonly understood as an agricultural process was used in the production of the forest treeswhich grow spontaneously and which were sold from time to time to clear of the overgrowth." Weagree that the income under this head was rightly assessed.Miscellaneous Civil Cases Nos. 92 and 98 of 1945. - The income in both these cases was from thesale of forest trees. The findings in each regarding the facts are the same as in Miscellaneous CivilCase No. 91 of 1945, and are given in the same words. Our conclusion is, therefore, the same in thesetwo cases as in Miscellaneous Civil case No. 91 of 1945.We now turn to points which are not common to all the cases. A question of interest arises inMiscellaneous Civil Case No. 63 of 1944, as also in Miscellaneous Civil Cases Nos 8 and 85 of 1945.We will deal with that. The question has been posed in much the same language in all three casesexcept for the figure. It was (we quote from Miscellaneous Civil Case No. 85 of 1945) :-Beohar Singh Raghubir Singh vs Commissioner Of Income-Tax U. P., ... on 4 September, 1946Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86313/8"Whether the sum of (Rs. 1,270) representing interest received by the assessee on the arrears ofagricultural rents due to him from his tenants is agricultural income within the meaning of section 2(1) (a) of the Income-tax Act ?"This matter has been recently decided by a Division Bench of this Court in Pratapmal Laxmichand,Firm v. Commissioner of Income-tax, U. P, C. P., & Berar. We do not feel free to differ from thisdecision though, had the matter been res integra, we might have taken another view.It was contended by the learned acting Advocate-General that the decision is distinguishable andthat it is, in any event wrong. The ground of distinction is said to be that the question posed therenarrows the scope of the enquiry to the Central Provinces Tenancy Act whereas here there are nosuch limitations. It is true the Central Provinces Tenance Act is expressly mentioned in the questionreferred in that case whereas it is not mentioned in the present cases but that makes no difference.We are not asked to decide whether all interest is exempt but whether interest received from tenantson the arrears of rent due from them is. These interests are received under the provisions of theCentral Provinces Tenancy Act and therefore whether the Act is expressly mentioned or not the factremains that the rent is received in the same way and for the same reasons in both sets of cases. Weare unable to distinguish that case from the present ones.As regards the contention that the decision is, in any event, wrong, we find that the matter isdebatable and that it is as easy for a Judge acting judicially to reach the one conclusion as the other.In an ultimate analysis it narrows down to a question of individual preference, it being possible toadvance cogent reasons on either side. That being the position, we do not fell free to differ, nor dothink it proper to refer the point to a Full Bench. This, we fell is one of the cases in which certainty isof more value than the doubtful satisfaction of reaching a conclusion by a mere counting of heads.The matter has been fully debated in other High Courts. Opinions have differed and the DivisionBench in the former case preferred one view to the other. In our view either the legislature shouldstep in and say which view should prevail, or we should in this Province accept the view of our ownHigh Court. After all the two, the rent and the interest, are so intimately bound together that it is notunreasonable to hold that they are species of the same genus, though we realise that it is anomalousthat while a man who receives his rent regularly and places the money it represents in a bank mustpay tax on the interest he receives from the bank whereas another who leaves his money with thetenant and receives interest from the tenant instead of from a bank need not. But anomalies arise onthe other view too. The interest is recoverable under the Central Provinces Tenancy Act in the sameway and along with the rent which is in arrear. It creates the same burden on the land and subjects adefaulting tenant to the same penalty. In the circumstances, we hold, following PratapmalLaxmichand Firm v. Commissioner of Income-tax, U. P., C. P., and Berar that the interest in thesethree cases is exempt from taxation, it being agricultural income.Miscellaneous Civil Case No. 7 of 1945 raises another question. We are asked to decide whether aprofit of Rs. 19,447 arising from the sale of forest produce, such as timber and tendu leaves, is areceipt of a capital nature and so exempt on that score.Beohar Singh Raghubir Singh vs Commissioner Of Income-Tax U. P., ... on 4 September, 1946Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86313/9Their Lordships of the Privy Council point out in Kamakshya Narain Singh v. Commissioner ofIncome-tax, Bihar & Orissa, that whether a given receipt is capital receipt or income depends oncircumstances, so that what is income in the hands of one man may be capital receipt in those ofanother. The facts here are admitted and are stated thus in the order of reference : "But it wasadmitted before us that the assessee sells timber annually and derives the income in question andthat there has been no reduction or loss of any capital asset, that is the forest land, by the timberbeing cut and sold."That places, the matter, in principle, on a par with the decision of the Judicial Committee just cited.We hold that the Rs. 19,447 under this head is income and was rightly included in the assessment.Miscellaneous Civil Case No. 8 of 1945 raises the following additional question :-"Whether there was any material to hold that the bazar dues and nazrana receipts of Rs. 171 and Rs.192 respectively were items of agricultural income."As regards this, the Tribunal said : "The learned advocate for the assessee explained that the itemscomprised in it were collections from persons who were permitted to erect temporary stalls on theassessees agricultural lands on weekly bazar days. The explanation itself is sufficient to reject theassessees claim to such receipts being regarded as agricultural income."With that we agree and add that the point was abandoned before us by council for the assessee whoappeared in place of Mr. Mangalmurti on the second day. We hold the Rs. 192 was rightly includedin the assessment.As regards the nazrana, receipts under this head can flow from sources which are not agricultural, asfor example, money taken from consent to a transfer of tenancy and other lands, presents on theoccasion of a marriage, and so forth. Therefore, until we know exactly what the nazrana consisted of,it is impossible for us to say whether the income is agricultural or not. The Tribunal says : "it wasalleged before us that it represented the amount levied from tenants taking up vacant plots for thepurpose of cultivation. But the statement was not borne out by any evidence."We asked counsel to point out any evidence to us which would indicate the nature of the nazranaand he admitted that was none. The burden is on the assessee and as he has produced no evidenceon this point his contention must fail. We hold there is no material and that the sum of Rs. 192 wasrightly assessed.The result of our findings is that the assessees have lost in all the cases and on all the points excepton the question of interest in three of the cases, namely, Miscellaneous Civil Case No. 63 of 1944 andMiscellaneous Civil Cases Nos. 8 and 85 of 1945. They will, therefore, pay the costs of theCommissioner in all but these three cases. Counsels fee Rs. 100 in each case.As regards the remaining three cases, the success of the assessee on this point in two of the cases isso negligible as compared with his failure that we think it proper that each should pay theBeohar Singh Raghubir Singh vs Commissioner Of Income-Tax U. P., ... on 4 September, 1946Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86313/10Commissioners costs there as well. In Miscellaneous Civil Case No. 63 of 1944 the assessee lost onthe item of Rs. 10,835 and succeeded only as regards Rs. 504. In Miscellaneous Civil Case No. 8 of1945 the assessee failed as regards Rs. 12,373 and succeeded as regards Rs. 314. We, therefore,direct that each of these two assesses should pay the Commissioners costs. Councils fee Rs. 100 ineach case.That leaves Miscellaneous Civil Case No. 85 of 1945. There, the success and failure is almost equal.The assessee lost as regards Rs. 1,799 and won as regards Rs. 1,270. There will be no order as tocosts in this case.Reference answered accordingly.Beohar Singh Raghubir Singh vs Commissioner Of Income-Tax U. P., ... on 4 September, 1946Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86313/11