Calcutta High CourtManickchand Durgaprasad vs Pratabmull Rameswar And Anr. on 20 February, 1961Equivalent citations: AIR 1961 Cal 483Author: LahiriBench: S Lahiri, R Bachawat, G MitterJUDGMENT Lahiri, C.J.1. The facts leading up to this Reference are as follows. The respondent, Pratabmull Rameswar, fileda suit against the petitioner for the recovery of a sum of Rs. 87,000/- as damages under thecircumstances stated in the plaint. The suit was dismissed by a single Judge sitting on the OriginalSide by a Judgment dated January 25, 1957. Against that decree the respondent tiled an appealwhich was heard by a Division Bench. By a judgment dated February 19, 1960, the Division Benchreversed the judgment and decree of the Court of first instance and decreed the respondent's suit.Against the decree of the Division Bench the petitioner filed an application for a certificate underArticle 133 of the Constitution, and by an order dated September 12, 1960, a certificate was grantedin favour of the petitioner. Under Order XLV, Rule 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure the petitionerwas required to furnish security within a period of six weeks from the date of the certificate orwithin a period of ninety days from the date of the decree complained of, which period could beextended by the Court for a maximum period of sixty days, whichever was the later date. As thedecree complained of was passed on February 19, 1960, the later date contemplated by Order XLV,Rule 7 was the date on which the period of six weeks from the grant of the certificate expired. Thisperiod of six weeks therefore expired on October 26, 1960, on which date the Court was closed forthe Annual Vacation. The Court reopened on November 15, 1960, but the petitioner could not makethe deposit on the reopening day. On November 23, 1960, the petitioner took out a Notice of Motionfor an order that the delay in depositing the amount of security for costs be condoned under Rules 5and 6 of Chapter XXXIIIA of the Original Side Rules. This Notice of Motion was made returnable onNovember 28, 1960 and it came up for hearing on December 12, 1960. The Division Bench whichhad to deal with the Notice of Motion was confronted with conflicting decisions on the question as towhether the Court had jurisdiction to extend the time limited by Order XLV, Rule 7. So far as thisCourt is concerned it has been held in a series of decisions that the Court has no power to extend thetime fixed by Order XLV, Rule 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure, hot most of the other High Courts ofIndia have taken a different view and have held either that the Court has power under Order XLV,Rule 7 itself to extend the time fixed by Order XLV, Rule 7 or that it has such power under OrderXII, Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules which is a substantial reproduction of Rule 9 framed by anOrder of His Majesty in Council in the year 1920. The Division Bench which dealt with the Notice ofMotion was inclined to think that the decisions of this Court to the effect that the Court is powerlessto extend the time fixed by Order XLV, Rule 7 were wrong, and upon that view it referred thefollowing questions to the Full Bench:1. Has the Court power under Order XII, Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules to extend the timelimited by Order XLV, Rule 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure?2. Has the Court power under Chapter XXXIIIA, Rule 5 of the Original Side Rules to extend the timelimited by Order XLV, Rule 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure?Manickchand Durgaprasad vs Pratabmull Rameswar And Anr. on 20 February, 1961Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/288100/13. Were the cases of Raj Kumar Govind Narain Singh v. Shamlal Singh, 39 Cal WN 651; Bipin BehariRay v. Rakhal Krishna, and Akimuddin Chaudhury v. Fateh Chand, ILR (1941) 1 Cal 299 correctlydecided?2. At the time of the argument before us Mr. Meyer appearing for the petitioner contended, in thefirst place, that apart from Order XII, Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules, the Court has power underOrder XLV, Rule 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure itself to extend the time. In support of thisproposition he relied upon a Full Bench decision of this Court in In re: Soorjmukhi Koer, ILR 2 Cal272, which was approved by the Privy Council in the case of Burjore and Bhawani Pershad v.Bhagana, ILR 10 Cal 557. The decision of the Full Bench of this Court was given under Section 11 ofAct VI of 1874 which was an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to appeals to PrivyCouncil from decrees and orders of Civil Courts. Section 11 of that Act was in the following terms:"If the certificate be granted, the applicant shall, within six months from the date of the decreecomplained of, or within six weeks from the grant of the certificate, whichever is the later date,(a) give security for the costs of the respondent, and * * * "The Full Bench of this Court held in ILR 2 Cal 272 that the requirements of Section 11 as to thedeposit of costs were not absolutely imperative. In the case of ILR 10 Cal 557 (PC), the Privy Councilhad to consider the words of Section 602 of the Code of Civil Procedure of 1877 which were verysimilar to the language of Section 11 of Act VI of 1874, and with regard to the decision of the FullBench of this Court their Lordships made the following observations:"Their Lordships .... have to say that they concur in the view which was taken by the Full Bench ofthe Court in Calcutta, that the words in the Act which have been quoted relating to the giving ofsecurity are directory only; ........ although not to be departed from without cogent reasons...".Section 602 of the Code of 1877 was reproduced as Section 602 of the Code of 1882, and it wasreplaced by Order XLV, Rule 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure of 1908. The language of Order XLV,Rule 7 of the Code of 1908 was the same as that of Section 602 of the Code of 1882 up to the year1920 when there was an amendment by Act XXVI of 1920.3. It is unnecessary to set out the language of Section 602 of the Codes of 1877 or of 1882 or of OrderXLV, Rule 7 as it stood prior to the amendment of 1920 because the language is the same as that ofSection 11 of Act VI of 1874. Under Section 602 of the Code of 1882 it was held by a decision of threeJudges of this Court in the case of Roy Jotindra Nath v. Rai Prasanna Kumar, 11 Cal WN 1104, thatthe Court has power to extend tune provided by that section. In this case this Court followed thedecision of the Privy Council in Burjore's case, ILR 10 Cal 557 (PC). It may therefore be taken forgranted that the decision of the Privy Council was good law under the Code of 1882 as well as underOrder XLV, Rule 7 as it stood prior to the amendment of 1920. The question is whether the decisionof the Privy Council is good law even alter the amendment of Order XLV, Rule 7 by Act XXVI of1920. The changes effected by the amendment arc two. In the first place, the amendment hascurtailed the period of six months from the date of the decree to a period of ninety days. In thesecond place, it has conferred upon the Court the power to extend time beyond the period of ninetyManickchand Durgaprasad vs Pratabmull Rameswar And Anr. on 20 February, 1961Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/288100/2days up to a maximum period of sixty days upon good cause shown. The amendment, however, hasleft the period of six weeks from the date of the grant of the certificate untouched. Upon this state ofthings Mr. Meyer contends that when the Legislature has not limited the power of extending timebeyond the period of six weeks from the grant of the certificate as it has done in respect of the periodof ninety days from the date of the decree, the power of the Court to extend time beyond six weeksfrom the grant of the certificate is unlimited upon the authority of the Privy Council decision. Inother words, the argument is that the effect of the Privy Council decision is lost by legislativeamendment only in respect of the period of ninety days from the date of the decree, but not inrespect of the period of six weeks from the date of the grant of the certificate and that the provisionof Order XLV, Rule 7 remains directory in respect of the second alternative. On behalf of therespondents Mr. Kar contends that at the time of the amendment in the year 1920 the Legislatureapplied its mind to the question of extension and gave the Court power to extend time up to amaximum period of sixty days under the first alternative without saving anything with regard to thesecond and, therefore, the Legislature has impliedly taken away power of the Court to extend timeunder the second alternative; and, therefore, the decision of the Privy Council in Burjore's case, ILR10 Cal 557 (PC) stands completely superseded in respect of both the alternatives. For the reasonswhich I am going to state presently it is not necessary to express any opinion on the merits of thesetwo rival contentions.4. In the first place, the question as to whether the Court has power under Order XLV, Rule 7 itselfto extend time beyond the limits provided by that rule has not been referred to the Full Bench. Buteven apart from that there is a stronger reason why it is not necessary to decide that question andthat is this. Simultaneously with the amendment of Order XLV, Rule 7 by Act XXVI of 1920 by anOrder in Council, Rule 9 of the Privy Council Rules was introduced. That rule runs as follows:"Where an appellant, having obtained a certificate for the admission of an Appeal, fails to furnishthe security or make the deposit required (or apply with due diligence to the Court for an Orderadmitting the Appeal), the Court may, on its own motion or on an application in that behalf made bythe Respondent, cancel the certificate for the admission of the Appeal, and may give such directionsas to the cost of the Appeal and the security entered into by the Appellant as the Court shall think fit,or make such further or other Order in the premises as, in the opinion of the Court, the justice of thecase requires".After the abolition of the Privy Council appeals in our Country this rule has been substantiallyreproduced by Order XII, Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules. According to Section 112(l)(b) of theCode of Civil Procedure."nothing contained in this Code shall be deemed to interfere with any rules made by the SupremeCourt " for the presentation of appeals to that Court, or their conduct before that Court". Rule 9 ofthe Privy Council Rules as well as Order XII, Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules control theprovision of Order XLV, Rule 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Whether the provision of Order XLV,Rule 7 be directory or mandatory it is in either case governed by Order XII, Rule 3 of the SupremeCourt Rules which is the successor of Rule 9 of the | Privy Council Rules. The question whether theeffect of the decision of the Privy Council in Burjore's case, ILR 10 Cal 557 (PC) has been completelyManickchand Durgaprasad vs Pratabmull Rameswar And Anr. on 20 February, 1961Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/288100/3lost as a result of the amendment of Order XLV, Rule 7 in the year 1920, therefore, is of academicinterest and need not be decided. In the ultimate analysis, the question whether the Court has or hasno power to extend time will have to be decided upon a true interpretation of Order XII, Rule 3 ofthe Supreme Court Rules. Upon the arguments advanced before us as well as upon the authoritiescited before us there are three possible views on the question as to whether the Court has power toextend time limited by Order XLV, Rule 7 (1) The Court has no power to extend the time eitherunder Order XLV, Rule 7 or under Rule 9 of the Privy Council Rules substituted by Order XII, Rule 3of the Supreme Court Rules; (2) tile Court has power both under Order XLV, Rule 7 and also underOrder XII, Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules to extend the time; and (3) the Court has no power toextend the time under Order XLV, Rule 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure, but has such power underOrder XII, Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules.5. The first proposition referred to above is supported by a series of decisions of this Court beginningwith the decision in the case of 39 Cal WN 651, decided by Rankin, C. J. and C. C. Ghosh, J.Although that decision was given as far back as December 6, I926, it was reported in the year1934-35. That was a case where on the failure of the holder of a certificate for appeal to the PrivyCouncil the respondent made an application for cancellation of the certificate on the ground . thatthe holder of the certificate had failed to furnish security within the time provided for by Order XLV,Rule 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Rankin, C. J., cancelled the certificate on the prayer of therespondent and towards the end of his judgment pointed out that though the case was somewhathard "(his is a question of jurisdiction. ... It does not seem to me possible to maintain that the Court,in its discretion under Rule 9 of the Order (Order or His Majesty in Council), made on the 9th day ofFebruary, 1920, could refuse the application made by the respondent".This observation in the judgment of Rankin, C. J., is the foundation of a series of decisions to theeffect that the Court has no power to extend time either under Order XLV, Rule 7 or under Rule 9 ofthe Privy Council Rules Mr. Meyer appearing for the petitioner contends that even in this judgmentRankin, C.J. is recognising the fact that under Rule 9 of the Privy Council Rules the Court has adiscretion in the matter of cancelling or not cancelling the certificate on the failure of the proposedappellant to Privy Council to furnish security within time. But it seems to me that his Lordship heldthat the question was not a question of discretion but a question of jurisdiction. In any view of thematter, there is hardly any doubt that the above observation of Rankin, C. J., is not his; consideredjudgment upon an interpretation of Rule 9 of the Privy Council Rules, but a parenthetical expressionof opinion. On an examination of the language of Kule 9 of the Privy Council Rules, it will appearthat on the failure of the proposed appellant to furnish security within time, the Court wasauthorised on its own motion or on application in that behalf to "cancel the certificate for theadmission of the Appeal" and to "give such directions as to the cost of the Appeal and the securityentered into by the Appellant as the Court shall think fit, or make such further or other order in thepremises as, in the opinion of the Court, the justice of the case requires". The point that requiresdecision on an interpretation of this rule is whether the Court is authorised under the lastalternative of Rule 9 of the Privy Council Rules to extend time. The clause which authorises theCourt to make such further or other order as the justice of case might require is, according to thepetitioner, an alternative to the power vested in the Court to cancel the certificate.. According to therespondent the last clause is not an alternative to the power of cancelling the certificate, but to theManickchand Durgaprasad vs Pratabmull Rameswar And Anr. on 20 February, 1961Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/288100/4power of giving directions as to the costs of the appeal and security. It seems to me that there can beno alternative to an order for costs or security. I The Court either makes an order for costs or doesnot make it or it directs cither of the parties to pay the costs of the successful party, and there can beno alternative to such an order. It seems to me therefore that the last alternative in the rule is analternative to the power of cancelling the certificate. Read in that light, (he true meaning of the ruleis that on the failure of the appellant to furnish security within time, the Court may either cancel thesecurity or make such further or other order as the justice of the case might require. This power, inmy opinion, includes the power to extend time for security upon good cause shown or, to use thewords of the Privy Council in Burjore's case ILR 10 Cal 557 "for cogent reasons". With all respectthat is due to a Judge of the eminence of Sir George Rankin, I hold that the observation made byhim in the case of Raj Kumar Govind Narain Singh, 39 Cal WN 651 is not based on a correctinterpretation of Rule 9 of the Privy Council Rules. The decision in Raj Kumar Govind NarainSingh's case, 39 Cal WN 651 was followed by Derbyshire. C.J. and Mukherjea. J. in the case of 44 CalWN 920: ILR (1941) 1 Cal 299. In this case it was pointed out that the decision in Raj Kumar GovindNarain Singh's case. 39 Cal WN 651 was in conflict with the Full Bench decision of the Bombay HighCourt in the case of Nilkanth Balwant v. Satchidananda Vidya Narsinha Bharati, ILR 51 Bom 430:(AIR 1927 Bom 217). Derbyshire, C. J., however, observed that although he had great respect for theFull Bench decision of the Bombay High Court, he was bound to give effect to the decision of theDivision Bench of this Court in Raj Kumar Govind Narain Singh's case, 39 Cal WN 651. Noadditional reason was given by his Lordship for following the decision of Sir George Rankin in RajKumar Govind Narain Singh's case, 39 Cal WN 651. The question again came up for considerationbelore a Bench consisting of Harries, C. J. and Banerjee, J., in the case of . In that case Harries, C. J.,pointed out in the opening paragraphs of the judgment that although as a judge of the Patna HighCourt his Lordship has taken the view that the Court has jurisdiction to extend time as the ChiefJustice of this Court his Lordship was bound to follow the trend of decisions of this Court to theeffect that the Court has no power to extend time. It appears from the judgment that his Lordshipwas pressed to refer the question to a Full Bench, but he rejected that prayer with the followingobservations;"A Full Bench decision affirming a long line of decisions of this Court would only make mattersworse".From this it appears that although Harries, C.J., was not inclined to agree with the view or Rankin,C. J., in Raj Kumar Govind Narain Singh's case, 39 Cal WN 651 he was bound to follow it as a judgeof this Court. The next case in which the question again fell for consideration is the case of PurnenduNath Tagore v. Radhakanta Jew, 54 Cal WN 479. Here again Harries, C. J., felt pressed by theauthorities of this Court to hold that the Court has no power to extend time either under Order XLV,Rule 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure or under Order XII, Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules beyondthe limits prescribed by Order XLV, Rule 7, but still Ms Lordship had held on an interpretation ofOrder XII, Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules that the Court had jurisdiction to alter the form of thesecurity which had been tendered within the time prescribed by Order XLV, Rule 7, but which wasfound to be defective. In another case between the same parties reported in Purnendu Nath v,Radhakanta Jew, Harries, C. J. made the following observation:Manickchand Durgaprasad vs Pratabmull Rameswar And Anr. on 20 February, 1961Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/288100/5" notwithstanding the proviso to Rule 7. Order 45, the Rule 9 prescribed by the Privy Councilprevails under Section 112 and the High Court has jurisdiction not only to extend the time formaking the deposit and for furnishing the security, hut also to change the form of security in a fitcase".The observation in this case appears to indicate that his Lordship was inclined to hold that the Courthas power to extend time both for making the deposit and for furnishing the security. But, with greatrespect, I must point out that the decision in the case reported is not in conformity with theobservations made in the case reported at page 479 (of Cal WN). The last reported case in which thepoint was considered is the case of Narayan Das Bhagwandas v. State of West Bengal, 62 Cal WN658, decided by Chakravartti, C. J., and Das Gupta, J. In this case Chakravartti, C. J. points out thatal-though other High Courts have taken a different view, this Court has consistently held that there isno discretion in the Court to extend the time limited by Order XLV, Rule 7 of the Code of CivilProcedure, but, nevertheless, his Lordship extended the time fixed by Chapter VI, Rule 28(3) of theAppellate Side Rules relating to appeals to the Supreme Court; the relevant portion of which is in thefollowing terms:" the applicant shall deposit a lump sum of Rs. 400/- within the time limited by Order XLV, Rule 7,of the Code of Civil Procedure, on account of the cost of the preparation of complete Parts I and II ofthe paper-book".It is difficult to appreciate the reason how, it the Court has no power to extend time limited by OrderXLV, Rule 7, it has that power when Order XLV, Rule 7 is incorporated in the body of the Rulesframed by this Court and it seems to me that in this case the Court was really attempting to relieve alitigant against the hardship resulting from the narrow construction of Order XLV, Rule 7 of theCode of Civil Procedure and Order XII, Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules. However that may be itappears that the foundation of all the subsequent five reported cases is the observation of Sir GeorgeRankin in Raj Kumar Govind Narain Singh's ease, 39 Cal WN 651 which I have already considered;and as I have already held that the observation of Rankin, C. J. in that case is not based upon acorrect interpretation of Rule 9 of the Privy Council Rules, which was the predecessor of Order XII,Rule 3, of the present Supreme Court Rules, it follows as a corollary that all the subsequent caseswhich are based upon Raj Kumar Govind Narain Singh's case, 39 Cal WN 651, were not alsocorrectly decided.6. In support of the second proposition that the Court has power both under Order XLV, Rule 7 ofthe Code of Civil Procedure and also under Order XII, Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules to extendthe time fixed by Order XLV, Rule 7, Mr. Meyer has cited three Full Bench judgments of thedifferent High Courts in India. The first one is a judgment of a Full Bench of the Lahore High Courtin the case of Diwan Ghulam Rasul v. Ghulam Qutab-ud-Din, AIR 1942 Lah 147. In that case the FullBench has held that the Court has power both under Order XLV, Rule 7 of the Code of CivilProcedure read with Rule 9 of the Privy Council Rules to extend the time fixed by Order XLV, Rule7. To the same effect is the decision of the Full Bench of the Nagpur High Court in the case of GulamManickchand Durgaprasad vs Pratabmull Rameswar And Anr. on 20 February, 1961Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/288100/6Hussain v. Mansurbeg, AIR 1952 Nag 302: ILR 1952 Nag 406. The Andhra High Court also takes thesame view in a Full Bench decision in the case of Thota Pichaiah v. Narasimhacharyulu, AIR 1956Andhra 120.7. The third proposition that the Court has no power to extend time under Order XLV, Rule 7 of theCode of Civil Procedure, but has such power under Rule 9 of the Privy Council Rules or Order XII,Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules, is supported by four Full Bench decisions of some other HighCourts of this country. The first one is the decision of a Full Bench of the Madras High Court in thecase of M. Ramayyia v. V. Lakshmayya, ILR (1938) Mad 1007 : (AIR 1938 Mad 796). In this case aFull Bench of the Madras High Court held that the effect of the amendment of Order XLV, Rule 7, byAct XXVI of 1920 was to limit the discretion of the Court in granting further time to a maximumperiod of sixty days beyond the ninety days which the applicant has as of right and if that provisionstood alone, the Court would have no discretion to grant time beyond the further period of sixtydays. But Rule 9 of the Privy Council Rules leaves discretion in the Court to extend the time and byreason of Section 112 of the Code that rule must prevail over Order XLV, Rule 7. The same view wastaken by a Full Bench of the Allahabad High Court in the case of M. Ramayyia v. V. Lakshmayya,ILR (1938) Mad 1007 : (AIR 1938 Mad 796 Bishnath Singh v. Court of Wards, Estate of Sri RamChandra Naik . A Full Bench decision of the Patna High Court presided over by Harries, C. J., tookthe same view in the case of Lachmeshwar Prasad v. Girdhari Lal, ILR 19 Pat 123: (AIR 1939 Pat667). The Court points out that under Order XLV, Rule 7 as it now stands the Court has no power togrant further time beyond the periods specified in that rule, but Rule 9 of the Privy Council Rulesgives the Court in Privy Council matters a power in proper cases to extend time. In Rangoon Rule 9of the Privy Council Rules was incorporated as a part of the First Schedule of the Code of CivilProcedure under Order 52. Rule 66. A Full Bench of the Rangoon High Court has held in the case ofIsmail Piperdi v. Momin Bibi, AIR 1940 Rang 12 that the High Court has power under Rule 9 of thePrivy Council Rules for cogent reasons to extend the time for furnishing security beyond that whichwas allowed by Order XLV, Rule 7 of the Code of Cml Procedure, and the Court has the same powerunder Order 52 Rule 66.8. In the case of ILR 51 Bom 430: (AIR 1927 Bom 217) (FB), there was a difference of opinionbetween two Judges of a Division Bench on the question whether the Court had power under OrderXLV, Rule 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure, independently of Rule 9 of the Privy Council Rules, toextend the time prescribed by Order XLV, Rule 7 and also whether the Court had such power underRule 9 of the Privy Council Rules. Shah, J., was of the opinion that the Court bad power under boththe provisions to extend the time. As Fawcett, J. held the contrary view both under Order XLV, Rule7 of the Code of Civil Procedure and under Rule 9 of the Privy Council Rules, the two questions werereferred to the Full Bench. Marten, C. J. in delivering the judgment of the Full Bench held that theCourt had power to extend time under Rule 9 of the Privy Council Rules and in that view of thematter it was not necessary to express any opinion on the true construction of Order XLV, Rule 7 asamended by Act XXVI of 1920,9. A review of the authorities therefore will show that there are as many as eight Full Benchdecisions of the different High Courts of our country in support of the view that the Court has powereither under Order XLV, Rule 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure or under Order XII, Rule 3 of theManickchand Durgaprasad vs Pratabmull Rameswar And Anr. on 20 February, 1961Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/288100/7Supreme Court Rules or under both to extend the time fixed by Order XLV, Rule 7, and this Court isalone in its view that the Court has no such power under either of the above provisions. It is truethat Order XII, Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules does not confer any right upon the appellant toapply for extension of time, but it would be preposterous to suggest that the Court can extend timeupon the respondent's application for cancellation of the certificate but not upon the appellant'sapplication for extension. In any case, the Court can extend time of its own motion when sufficientgrounds are placed before it by the appellant's application.10. For the reasons which I have already given I hold that the decisions of this Court as to the truescope and effect of Rule 9 of the Privy Council Rules, which is now substituted by Order XII, Rule 3of the Supreme Court Rules, are not correct. As I have already said, it is not necessary for us in thisReference to decide the question as to whether the Court has power under Order XLV, Rule 7,independently of Order XII, Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules to extend the time. I agree with theopinion of Marten C. J., of the Bombay High Court that in view of the fact that the Court has powerto extend time under Order XII, Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules, it is unnecessary to consider thequestion whether the Court has the same power under Order XLV, Rule 7 itself.11. As a result of this discussion it follows that question No. 1 referred to the Full Bench must beanswered in the affirmative and that question No. 3 should be answered in the negative.12. It now remains for me to consider question No. 2 which relates to the power of the Court toextend time under Chapter XXXIIIA, Rule 5 of the Original Side Rules, That rule is in these terms:"Where such a certificate (meaning a certificate of fitness for appeal to the Supreme Court) isgranted, the appellant shall, within the time prescribed by law or within such further time as may begranted by the Appellate Court, find security for the payment of costs, ordinarily to the extent of Rs.4,000, and ........."On a plain interpretation of this rule it is clear that it expressly confers upon the Court the power toextend time beyond the period prescribed by law. As I read this rule, the period prescribed by lawmeans the period prescribed by Order XLV, Rule 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The 'further time'which the Appellate Court is expressly empowered to grant is in addition to "the time prescribed byOrder XLV, Rule 7. The question that has been argued before us is whether the Court has, in theexercise of its rule making power, any jurisdiction to add to the provisions of Order XLV, Rule 7. Therules under Chapter XXXIIIA were presumably framed in exercise of the powers conferred upon thisCourt by Clause 37 of the Letters Patent which empowers this Court "to make rules and orders forthe purpose of regulating all proceedings in civil cases which may be brought before the said HighCourt, including proceedings in its Admiralty, Vice-Admiralty, Testamentary, Intestate, andMatrimonial Jurisdiction respectively".There is a proviso which lays down that in making the rules the "High Court shall be guided as tar aspossible, by the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure". Mr. Kar appearing for the respondentcontends that this rule making power is only in respect of suits and proceedings which arc pendingbefore a Judge sitting on the Original Side and this rule making power does not extend to theManickchand Durgaprasad vs Pratabmull Rameswar And Anr. on 20 February, 1961Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/288100/8making of any rules regulating procedure in appeals or any pro ceedings relating to appeals in theSupreme Court. I cannot accept this argument of Mr. Kar as sound.Under this clause the ambit of rule making power is very wide. The phrase "including proceedings inits Admiralty, Vice-Admiralty," etc., is merely descriptive of proceedings in civil cases which may bebrought before the High Court, I am not prepared to hold that the rule making power conferred byClause 37 of the Letters Patent is confined to the making of rules relating to suits and proceedingsinstituted or initiated on the Original Side. An application for a certificate under Article 133 of theConstitution, is, in my opinion, a proceeding in a Civil Case brought before this Court and the HighCourt has power to frame rules relating to such an application. It is true that in Ormond's OriginalSide Rules, 4th Edition (1940), at page Ixxxviii of the Introduction there is a passage which runsthus:"The words 'in civil cases which may be brought before the said High Court' do not make italtogether clear whether the original jurisdiction only of the court is referred to or whether a poweris also being given to regulate proceedings in civil cases which come before the Court in its appellatejurisdiction, (The prevailing opinion appears to have been, however, that the power under Clause 37is restricted to the making of Rules for operation on the Original Side of the Court only.)"The portion within brackets is the subject-matter of controversy before us. It appears that noauthority is cited by Ormond in support of the proposition within brackets. He merely refers to theprevailing opinion on the matter. On the other hand, it has been held in the case of Hirabai v.Bhagirath Ramchandra and Co. that the rules framed under Clause 37 of the Letters Patent are notconfined in their application to suits and proceedings on the Original Side only. I accordingly holdthat the rules framed by the High Court under Chapter XXXIIIA of the Original Side Rules arewithin the rule making powers of this Court under Clause 37 of the Letters Patent.13. There is still a further question and that is whether the rules framed under Clause 37 of theLetters Patent can add anything to what has been provided for by the Code of Civil Procedure or, ifthere is any inconsistency between the rules framed under Clause 37 of the Letters Patent and theprovision of the Code of Civil Procedure, which one is to prevail? So far as the present matter isconcerned Rule 5 of chapter XXXIIIA of the Original Side Rules merely adds to the periodprescribed by 'Order XLV, Rule 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure by authorising the Appellate Courtto grant time beyond what is prescribed by law. The restriction upon the power of the Court ascontained in the proviso to Clause 37 of the Letters Patent is that the rules framed under that clauseshould, "as far as possible" be in conformity with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure. Thisrestriction as the phrase "as far as possible" indicates is merely directory. The provisions of the Codeof Civil Procedure are intended for the purpose of guidance of this Court in framing rules underClause 37 of the Letters Patent. Consequently, if any rule framed by the High Court under Clause 37be inconsistent with or confers any additional power besides what is granted by the Code of CivilProcedure, the rule framed under Clause 37 will prevail over the corresponding provisions of theCode of Civil Procedure. This is the view which has been taken of the true effect of a rule framedunder Clause 37 of the Letters Patent by the Bombay High Court in the case of and also by this Courtin the case of Rajkumar Pal v. Janabali Mia . I accordingly hold that Rule 5 of Chapter XXXIIIA ofManickchand Durgaprasad vs Pratabmull Rameswar And Anr. on 20 February, 1961Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/288100/9the Original Side Rules authorises the Appellate Court to extend time beyond the limits provided forby Order XLV, Rule 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The effect of Chapter XXXIIIA, Rule 5 of theOriginal Side Rules was not considered in any of the cases decided by this Court, because all thosecases arose out of Appellate Side matters and did not require any consideration of Chapter XXXIIIA,Rule 5 of the Original Side Rules. The second question referred to the Full Bench should therefore inmy opinion, be also answered in the affirmative.14. I accordingly answer questions 1 and 2 In the affirmative, and question No. 3 in the negative;15. In view of the fact that there was a uniform body of decisions of this Court in favour of therespondent with which we have expressed our dissent in our judgment, I would direct that theparties to this Reference to pay and bear their own costs up to this stage.16. Let the application be now placed before the Division Bench for consideration on the merits.Bachawat, J.17. I agree with the answers given by my. Lord.18. The appellant who has obtained a certificate from the High Court as to value or fitness for appealunder Article 133 of the Constitution is required by Order 45 Rule 7 of the Civil Procedure Code1908 to furnish security for the costs of the respondent and to deposit the amount needed for theexpense of preparation and transmission of the records within the time specified in that rule. If theappellant fails to furnish the security within time, the Court will not declare the appeal admittedunder Order 45 Rule 9 C. P. C. 1908; nevertheless in spite of the default, the certificate granted bythe Court remains in force and is not automatically cancelled without a further order of the Court.The Order for cancellation of the certificate may be made under Order 12 Rule 3 of the SupremeCourt Rules 1950. Under that rule in such a case the Court may cancel the certificate and give otherdirections incidental on such cancellation. But the Court is not bound to cancel the certificate. Inlieu of cancelling it, the Court may make Such further or other order as the justice of the caserequires. If the justice of the case so requires, the Court may make an order extending the time tofurnish the security.19. The power under Order 12 Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules, 1950, "to make such further orother order as the justice of the 'case requires" is a power to be exercised in lieu of the power tocancel the certificate and to give directions as to the costs of the appeal and the security entered intoby the appellant. The power "to make such further or other order as the justice of the case requires"is not a power to give directions consequential on the cancellation of the certificate. The directionswhich are necessary upon the cancellation of the certificate are directions with regard to the costs ofthe appeal and with regard to the security entered into by the appellant. The power to give suchconsequential directions is expressly given by the rule.20. The general power to make a just order in a case where the appellant has failed to furnish thesecurity conferred by Order 12 Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules, 1950 is in no way controlled byManickchand Durgaprasad vs Pratabmull Rameswar And Anr. on 20 February, 1961Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/288100/10the provisions of Order 45 Rule 7 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908. by Section 112 of the CivilProcedure Code, 1908 nothing in the Code is deemed to interfere with the provisions of the Rules ofthe Supreme Court 1950. As a matter of fact Order 45 rule 7 of the Civil Procedure Code 1908 doesnot purport to interfere with the provisions of Order 12 Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules, Older 45Rule 7 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 has a long ancestry. It was preceded by Section 11 of thePrivy Council Appeal Act VI of 1874, Section 602 of the Civil Procedure Code, Act X of 1877 andSection 602 of the Civil Procedure Code, Act XIV of 1882. In ILR 2 Cal 272, a Bench of three Judgesof this Court decided that the requirements of Section 11 of the Privy Council Appeal Act VI of 1874as to the deposit of costs were not absolutely imperative and that the Court had some discretion tomodify its provisions and to extend the" time for giving the security. This decision was approved bythe Privy Council in the case of ILK 11 I. A. 7 : ILR 10 Cal 557. The Privy Council decided that thewords in Section 602 of the Civil Procedure Code, Act X of 1877 relating to the giving of securitywere directory only, although not to be departed from without cogent reason and that the court in itsdiscretion could extend the time. Following the Privy Council decision, a Bench of three Judges ofthis court decided in the case of 11 Cal WN 1104, that the court had similar power under Section 602of the Civil Procedure Code (Act XIV of 1882) to extend the time. The provisions of Order 45 Rule 7of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 as it stood before its amendment by Act XXVI of 1920 weresimilar to those of Section 602 of the Civil Procedure Code 1882. The amending Act XXVI of 1920 asalso an order of the King in Council dated February 9, 1920 promulgating the Privy Council Rules of1920 came into force on January 1, 1921. Rule 9 of the Privy Council Rules, 1920 gave power to theHigh Court similar to the power now conferred upon it by Order 12 Rule 3 of the Rules of theSupreme Court, 1950. Act XXVI of 1920 amended the provision of Order 45 Rule 7 of the CivilProcedure Code, 1908 by substituting the words "ninety days or .... cause shown allow" in place ofthe words "six months''. The object of the amendment of Order 45 Rule 7 of the Civil ProcedureCode, 1908 was to minimize delays in the disposal of appeals to the Privy Council. The amendedOrder 45 Rule 7 Sub-rule 1 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 empowers the court to extend theperiod of ninety days mentioned in the first part of the Sub-rule for a further period not exceedingsixty days, but it does not confer any power to extend the period of six weeks mentioned in thesecond part of the Sub-rule. But the Privy Council Rules of 1920 came into force simultaneously andRule 9 of those rules conferred general power upon the court to make such order as the justice of thecase requires in a case where the appellant fails to furnish security. Having regard to the generalpower so conferred it was not necessary to make a specific provision in Sub-rule 1 of Rule 7 of Order45 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 giving power to the court to extend the time mentioned in thesecond part of the Sub-rule. It was intended that the lime limit specified in Order 415 Rule 7 mustnormally be adhered to, but that in exceptional cases the court might under its general powerconferred by Rule 9 of the Privy Council Rules, 1920, extend the time. Order 12 Rule 3 of theSupreme Court Rules 1950 substantially reproduces the provisions of Rule 9 of the Privy CouncilRules 1920.21. Order 12 Rule 3 of the Rules of the Supreme Court does not give a substantive right to theappellant who has failed to furnish the security to apply for extension of time. Such an appellant isentirely at the mercy of the court. The court may exercise its powers under that rule on anapplication made by the respondent, or of its own motion if no such application is made. In this casethere is no application by the respondent for the cancellation of the certificate, nevertheless theManickchand Durgaprasad vs Pratabmull Rameswar And Anr. on 20 February, 1961Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/288100/11court may of its motion act under the rule.22. The contention of Mr. Kar that Order 12 Rule 3 read with the definition of "Court" in Rule 2 ofOrder 1 of the Supreme Court Rules, 1950 confers power upon the Supreme Court and not upon theHigh Court is baseless. The expression "that Court" in Rule 3 of Order 12 quite clearly refers to thelast antecedent "High Court".23. Though the Court has some discretion under Order 12 Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules 1950to extend the time to furnish the security, the court must exercise this discretion judicially. In theexercise of its discretion the court ought not to extend the time lightly and without cogent reason.24. In the instant case the appellant to the Supreme Court seeks to appeal to the Supreme Courtfrom a judgment passed by this court on appeal from a judgment passed on the Original Side. Thematter is therefore governed by Chapter XXXIIIA of the Rules of the Original Side. By Rule 5 ofChapter XXXIIIA the Court may allow further time for giving the security. The court is competent toframe that rule. The rules in Chapter XXXIIIA of the rules on the Original Side were made by thiscourt in the exercise of its powers under Clause 37 of the Letters Patent. By that clause the HighCourt has power "to make rules and orders for the purpose of regulating all proceedings in civilcases which may be brought before the High Court, including proceedings in its Admiralty,Vice-Admiralty, Testamentary, Intestate and Matrimonial Jurisdiction respectively.'' Proceedingsrelating to the grant of a certificate of appeal to the Supreme Court are proceedings in a civil casebrought before the High Court. The suggestion that the expression "all proceedings in civil caseswhich may be brought before the said High Court" should be given an ejusdem generis constructionand should be limited to original civil proceedings, such as proceedings brought in the Admiralty,Vice-Admiralty, Testamentary, Intestate and Matrimonial jurisdiction, is baseless. There is nowarrant for giving such construction. The court is empowered to make rules with regard to allpro-ceedings in civil cases brought before it. The proceedings expressly mentioned are illustrativeand not restrictive. No authority is cited in support of the statement at page LXXXVIII of theintroduction to the Rules of the Original Side, 4th Edition edited by Mr. E. C. Ormond that "theprevailing opinion appears to have been however, that the power under Clause 37 is restricted to themaking of Rules for operation of the Original Side of the Court only".Under Clause 37 of the Letters Patent this court can make rules regulating its procedure in theOriginal as also the Appellate Side of the court, see . In making rules the court is to be guided as faras possible by the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code but if there is an inconsistency between therules framed under Clause 37 of the Letters Patent and rules in the Civil Procedure Code, the formermust prevail, see Ram Dayal De .G.K. Mitter, J.25. I agree with the views expressed by My Lord the Chief Justice and I have nothing to add.Manickchand Durgaprasad vs Pratabmull Rameswar And Anr. on 20 February, 1961Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/288100/12