Madhya Pradesh High CourtCommissioner Of Income-Tax vs Bhabuti Contractor on 13 March, 1987Equivalent citations: 1990 183 ITR 445 MPAuthor: N OjhaBench: N Ojha, R ShrivastavaJUDGMENT N.D. Ojha, C.J.1. In this case, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal has referred the following question to this courtfor its opinion :"Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and on a proper construction of Section271(2) of the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Tribunal was correct in law in upholding the cancellation ofpenalty by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner under Section 271(1)(a) of the Act ?"2. Shri Lahoti appeared for the Commissioner of Income-tax, while Shri J.P. Gupta appeared for theassessee. During the course of arguments in this case, learned counsel for the parties made astatement today that another Miscellaneous Civil Case No. 97 of 1983 in which a similar questionwas involved and in which also the assessee was represented by Shri J.P. Gupta and Shri Lahotiappeared for the Commissioner of Income-tax, be also taken up and decided along with theMiscellaneous Civil Case No. 43 of 1983. In view of the joint request made by learned counsel forboth parties, we sent for the record of Miscellaneous Civil Case No. 97 of 1983 and are deciding thesame along with this Miscellaneous Civil Case No. 43 of 1983.3. The question of law which has been referred by the Tribunal in Miscellaneous Civil Case No. 97 of1983 is as follows :"Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal wascorrect in law in cancelling the penalty levied under Section 271(1)(a) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 ?"4. The judgment in the present Miscellaneous Civil Case No. 43 of 1983 shall govern the disposal ofMiscellaneous Civil Case No. 97 of 1983 also.5. The questions of law referred in these two cases are apparently identical. Before answering thesequestions, it would be necessary to give in a nutshell the relevant facts in each of these two cases.6. The facts of Miscellaneous Civil Case No. 43 of 1983 are that the assessee is a registered firmexecuting contract work. It was required to file its return for the year 1973-74 which was delayed.Consequently, penalty proceedings were initiated by the Income-tax Officer for late filing of thereturn and ultimately, a penalty of Rs. 5,210 was imposed on the assessee. On appeal, the AppellateAssistant Commissioner cancelled the penalty on the ground that penal action was not appropriateinasmuch as there was no default in paying the tax. This view was upheld by the Tribunal in itsappellate order. On an application being made by the Commissioner of Income-tax, the question oflaw referred to above was referred to this court by the Tribunal for its opinion.Commissioner Of Income-Tax vs Bhabuti Contractor on 13 March, 1987Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1594390/17. The facts of Miscellaneous Civil Case No. 97 of 1983, on the other hand, are that the assessee toois a registered firm. It was required to file its return in regard to the assessment year 1975-76.However, the return was not filed within time and there was a default of 10 months in doing so. TheIncome-tax Officer in this case also initiated proceedings of penalty under Section 271(1)(a) of theAct and a penalty of Rs. 7,886 was imposed. In appeal, the Appellate Assistant Commissionerreversed the order of the Income-tax Officer. It took the view that since the assessee had not onlypaid the entire amount of the tax, but he had also paid more tax and indeed a sum of Rs. 2,340 wasliable to be refunded to him, no case for imposition of penalty was made out. This view was affirmedby the Tribunal and the second appeal preferred by the Commissioner of Income-tax was dismissed.In this case also, the Tribunal, on an application being made in this behalf by the Commissioner ofIncome-tax, referred the above question of law to this court for its opinion. It is in this manner thatthese two Miscellaneous Civil Cases have come up before us.8. The answer to the questions referred in these two cases (in short, the questions referred) dependson an interpretation of the provisions of Sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 271 of the Income-taxAct, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act"). Since the entire provisions of Sub-section (1) ofSection 271 of the Act are not for consideration before us, we refer only to that portion of Section 271of the Act on which reliance has been placed by learned counsel for the parties. Clause (i) includingits Explanation was substituted by the Direct Taxes (Amendment) Act, 1974, with retrospectiveeffect from April 1, 1962. Some amendment therein has been made by the Taxation Laws(Amendment) Act, 1975.9. Sub-section (1) of Section 271, in so far as it is relevant for the purposes of the present case and onwhich reliance was placed by learned counsel for the parties, reads as under :"271. (1) If the Income-tax Officer or the Appellate Assistant Commissioner or the Commissioner(Appeals) in the course of any proceedings under this Act, is satisfied that any person-(a) has without reasonable cause failed to furnish the return of total income which he was requiredto furnish under Sub-section (1) of Section 139 or by notice given under Sub-section (2) of Section139 or Section 148 or has without reasonable cause failed to furnish it within the time allowed and inthe manner required by Sub-section (1) of Section 139 or by such notice, as the case may be, or(b) has without reasonable cause failed to comply with a notice under Sub-section (1) of Section 142or Sub-section (2) of Section 143 (or fails to comply with a direction issued under Sub-section (2A)of Section 142), or(c) has concealed the particulars of his income or furnished inaccurate particulars of such income,he may direct that such person shall pay by way of penalty-(i) in the cases referred to in Clause (a)--...(b) in any other case, in addition to the amount of the tax, if any, payable by him, a sum equal to twoper cent. of the assessed tax for every month during which the default continued.Commissioner Of Income-Tax vs Bhabuti Contractor on 13 March, 1987Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1594390/2Explanation.--In this clause, 'assessed tax' means tax as reduced by the sum, if any, deducted atsource under Chapter XVII-B or paid in advance under Chapter XVII--C."10. Sub-section (2) of Section 271, on the other hand, reads as under :"When the person liable to penalty is a registered firm or an unregistered firm which has beenassessed under Clause (b) of Section 183, then, notwithstanding anything contained in the otherprovisions of this Act, the penalty imposable under Sub-section (1) shall be the same amount aswould be imposable on that firm if that firm were an unregistered firm."11. It has been urged by Shri Lahoti, appearing for the Department, that Clauses (a), (b) and (c) ofSub-section (1) of Section 271 which constitute the first part are the charging provisions, whereasClause (i) occurring after the words "he may direct that such person shall pay by way of penalty"contains the provision only in regard to the quantification of penalty and has no bearing indetermining the question as to whether an assessee is liable to penalty or not. According to him, ifany of the defaults contemplated by Clauses (a), (b) or (c) has been committed by an assessee, hebecomes liable to penalty and the question as to what amount of penalty, if any, should be imposedon him, is to be decided in the manner provided for in Clause (i) referred to above. It has furtherbeen urged by Shri Lahoti that once the assessee is found to be liable to penalty, having committedany of the defaults contemplated by Clauses(a), (b) and (c) of Sub-section (1) of Section 271 of the Act and the said assessee happens to be aregistered firm, Sub-section (2) of Section 271 of the Act is immediately attracted and for thepurpose of determining the quantum of penalty to be determined under Clause (i), the registeredfirm has to be treated as an unregistered firm.12. For the assessees in these two cases, on the other hand, it has been urged by their learnedcounsel that Section 271(1)(a) which alone is relevant for the purpose of the present two casesinasmuch as it is that sub-section which has been taken recourse to in the instant cases on theground that the assessees had, without reasonable cause, failed to furnish the return of total income,has to be read with Clause (i) together with its Explanation even for deciding the question as towhether the assessee is liable to penalty or not. According to him, the mere fact that Clause (i) hasbeen placed separately from Clauses (a), (b) and (c) and at a place relevant for determination of theamount of penalty, it cannot be said that the said Sub-clause (i) and the Explanation attachedthereto had to be ignored for determining the question as to whether the assessee is liable to penaltyor not. It was urged that the very purpose of inserting the Explanation in Clause (i) was to find outas to whether there was any assessed tax or not payable by the assessee. According to him, in thosecases where, on account of the tax being deducted at source under Chapter XVII-B or being paid inadvance under Chapter XVII-C, there is no tax liability, the assessee will not be liable to penaltynotwithstanding the fact that he may have failed to furnish the return of total income withoutreasonable cause. The view propounded by learned counsel for the assessee, as seen above, hasfound favour with the Tribunal.Commissioner Of Income-Tax vs Bhabuti Contractor on 13 March, 1987Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1594390/313. In order to find out the true import of Sub-section (1)(a) and Sub-section (2) of Section 271 of theAct, it is necessary to refer to certain decided cases: We shall first refer to those cases on whichreliance has been placed by learned counsel for the Department. In CIT v. S.K Angidi Chettiar [1962]44 ITR 739 (SC), Section 28 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, came up for consideration. Whiledealing with the provisions of Section 28 of that Act with reference to a registered firm, it was held(at page 743) :"The assumption that the expression 'any tax' used in Section 28(1) is intended to indicate that theremust be some tax payable by the assessee before penalty could be imposed is wholly unwarranted.The futility of the assumption is exhibited by the terms of Clause (b). Penalty may be imposed forfailure to comply with the notice under Sub-section (4) of Section 22 or Sub-section (2) of Section 23even if the assessee has no assessable income. To the imposition of a penalty, liability to pay tax bythe person against whom the penalty is sought to be imposed is, therefore, not a conditionprecedent."14. In CIT v. R. Ochhavlal and Co. [1976] 105 ITR 518 (Guj) where Section 271 itself of the Act cameup for consideration, it was held that the penal liability contemplated by Sub-section (2) of Section271 falls within any of the Clauses (a), (b) or (c) of Section 271 of the Act which contemplated threedistinct types of defaults. The moment it is found that any one of these three defaults is committedby an assessee which is a registered firm, the said assessee becomes "liable to penalty" within themeaning of Sub-section (2). It was pointed out that Clauses (a), (b) and (c) constitute the first part ofSub-section (1) of Section 271 of the Act. This part indicated when and under what circumstances apenal liability came into existence. The second part of Sub-section (1) of Section 271 was constitutedby Clauses (i), (ii) and (iii). The function of Clauses (a), (b) and (c) was to create a penal liability,whereas the function of Clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) was to quantify the said liability. With reference toSub-section (2) of Section 271 of the Act, it was held that if a registered firm had committed any ofthe defaults contemplated by Clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Section 271(1), it follows that the registeredfirm in question was a person "liable to penalty "within the meaning of Section 271(2). When it wasfound that such a registered firm had rendered itself liable to penalty, then, under the deemingfiction which was contemplated by the latter part of Sub-section (2), such a firm should be treated asan unregistered firm and the quantification of penalty should be worked out on the amount whichwould be imposable on the firm as if it were an unregistered firm. After computation ascontemplated by Section 271(2), if it could not be said that it was not liable to any tax, then it wouldnot be impossible to work out the penalty contemplated by the relevant clause.15. The same principle was reiterated by the Madras High Court in CIT v. Kandaswami WeavingFactory and Co. [1977] 110 ITR 84. It was held that Section 271(2) of the Income-tax Act, 1961, dealtwith the quantum of penalty imposable in the case of a registered firm and for that purpose, createda fiction. The effect of Section 271(2) was to treat a registered firm as an unregistered firm, computethe income of the unregistered firm and assess the tax payable by the said unregistered firm on theincome so computed and calculate penalty on that basis. The contention that in view of theamendment to Section 271(1) of the Act by the Direct Taxes (Amendment) Act, 1974, no penaltycould be imposed on a registered firm which had paid the entire tax before the imposition ofpenalty, was found to be without substance.Commissioner Of Income-Tax vs Bhabuti Contractor on 13 March, 1987Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1594390/416. In Todarmal Safarishmal Lashkar v. CIT [1979] 118 ITR 759 (MP), after referring to the relevantprovisions of Section 271 of the Act, it was held that the language of the section was abundantly clearand certain. Penalty could be imposed only under one or more of the circumstances mentioned inClauses (a), (b) and (c) of Sub-section (1) of Section 271 of the Act and the quantum of penalty wasprescribed in Clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of the same sub-section. It was further emphasised that theincome-tax authorities were empowered to impose penalty only if there existed one or morecircumstances enumerated in Clauses (a), (b) and (c), but not otherwise. But where any of thesecircumstances existed, the authority had power to impose penalty.17. In CIT v. Priya Gopal Bishoyee [1981] 127 ITR 778, it was held by the Calcutta High Court thatSub-section (2) of Section 271 of the Act provides that when a person liable to penalty is a registeredfirm or an unregistered firm which had been assessed under Clause (b) of Section 183 then,notwithstanding anything contained in the other provisions of this Act, the penalty imposable underSub-section (1) shall be the same amount as would be imposable on that firm as if that firm were anunregistered firm. Therefore, for the purpose of imposition of penalty, the firm, even if it isregistered, and, if it has committed a default as contemplated under Section 271, it would be treatedon the same basis as if it was an unregistered firm. It was pointed out that as an unregistered firm,the tax in the circumstances would have been, as would be borne out from the facts on record, Rs.15,805 but if it was a registered firm; then the tax payable would have been Rs. 5,657.44. This sumof Rs. 5,657.44 had been paid on September 20, 1967, while the order for the imposition of penaltywas passed subsequent thereto on June 26, 1969. On these facts, it was held that at the date whenthe imposition of penalty was made there would have been no assessed tax if it was a registered firm,but if it was an unregistered firm and for the purpose of determination of imposition of penalty, itwould be treated as an unregistered firm and if it is so treated, then the assessed tax must be treatedfor calculating it (the penalty) on the basis as if it was an unregistered firm and if that is so, then forevery month during which the default had continued, the assessee would be liable to penalty.18. In Delux Publishing Co. v. Addl. CIT [1981] 127 ITR 782, a Division Bench of this court, whileinterpreting Sub-section (2) of Section 271 of the Act, held that, by the said sub-section, a fiction hadbeen created and even if the person liable to pay penalty was a registered firm, the penaltyimposable shall be the same amount as would be imposable on that firm if that firm were anunregistered firm. It was further pointed out that in the case of a registered firm, the tax assessablehad to be worked out as if it was an unregistered firm and on that basis the penalty had to becalculated because the fiction created had to be carried to its logical end19. In Maya Rani Punj v. CIT [1986] 157 ITR 330 (SC) it was held that in view of the language usedin Section 271(1)(a) of the Act, the position is beyond dispute that the Legislature intended to deemthe non-filing of the return to be a continuing default--the wrong for which penalty is to be visitedcommences from the date of default and continues month after month until compliance is made andthe default comes to an end. It was further held that the imposition of penalty not confined to thefirst default but with reference to the continued default was obviously on the footing thatnon-compliance with the obligation of making a return was an infraction as long as the defaultcontinued. Without sanction of law, no penalty is imposable with reference to the defaultingconduct. The position that penalty is imposable not only for the first default but as long as theCommissioner Of Income-Tax vs Bhabuti Contractor on 13 March, 1987Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1594390/5default continues and such penalty is to be calculated at a prescribed rate on monthly basis isindicative of the legislative intention in unmistakable terms that, as long as the assessee does notcomply with the requirements of law, he continues to be guilty of the infraction and exposes himselfto the penalty provided by law.20. Learned counsel for the Department has also placed reliance on two decisions which lay downthe reason of a different rule being incorporated in Sub-section (2) of Section 271 of the Act inregard to a registered firm liable to penalty. One such case is a Division Bench decision of this courtin CIT v. Chotelal Kanhaiylal [1971] 80 ITR 656. It was held as under (at page 658) :"In the case of registered firms no tax was payable before 1956. Since 1956 some nominal amount oftax has been made payable by registered firms also, but they remain free from payment of the bulkof the tax. In such a case, therefore, if a registered firm makes default in furnishing the return withintime, it was not possible to calculate the penally as there was practically no tax payable. In order toobviate this difficulty, the Legislature has enacted Sub-section (2) of Section 271 which is as follows :'When the person liable to penalty is a registered firm or an unregistered firm which has beenassessed under Clause (b) of Section 183, then, notwithstanding anything contained in the otherprovisions of this Act, the penalty imposable under Sub-section (1) shall be the same amount aswould be imposable on that firm if that firm were an unregistered firm.' This sub-section creates afiction in law. Although the firm against which a penalty is to be imposed is a registered firm and,therefore, not liable to pay tax, yet that firm has to be assumed to be unregistered for the purpose ofcalculating tax liability and on that basis, penalty has to be imposed."21. In Jain Brothers v. Union of India [1970] 77 ITR 107 (SC), the constitutional validity ofSub-section (2) of Section 271 of the Act was challenged on the ground that it was discriminatory.Repelling the challenge, it was held as under (at page 118) :"Lastly, the challenge to Section 271(2) of the Act of 1961 on the ground of contravention of Article14 may be considered. According to that provision, when the person liable to penalty is a registeredfirm, then notwithstanding anything contained in the other provisions of the Act of 1961, the penaltyimposable under Sub-section (1) shall be the same amount as would be imposable on that firm ifthat firm were an unregistered firm. It is pointed out that in the case of assessees other thanregistered firms; the maximum penalty imposable under Section 271(1)(i) cannot exceed in theaggregate 5056 of the tax payable by the assessee ; whereas in the case of a registered firm, themaximum penalty is not made to depend upon the tax assessed on or payable by such firm. On thecontrary, the registered firm will have to pay the same penalty as an unregistered firm which may farexceed the maximum limit of 50% prescribed by the above provision. This according to theappellants, constitutes discrimination under Article 14 of the Constitution. Now, a firm whenregistered is treated as a separate entity liable to tax. After 1956, it has to pay tax at a special reducedrate. If a firm got itself registered, the partners were entitled to certain benefits and advantages. Itwas, however, open to the Legislature to say that once a registered firm committed a defaultattracting penalty, it should be deemed or considered to be an unregistered firm for the purpose ofits imposition. No question of discrimination under Article 14 can arise in such a situation. We fullyCommissioner Of Income-Tax vs Bhabuti Contractor on 13 March, 1987Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1594390/6share the view of the High Court that there was nothing to prevent the Legislature from giving thebenefit of a reduced rate to a registered firm for the purpose of tax, but withhold the same when itcommitted a default and became liable to imposition of penalty'."22. Shri J.P. Gupta, appearing for the assessee, has, apart from distinguishing the cases relied on bylearned counsel for the Department, placed reliance on some decisions where a view similar to thattaken by the Tribunal has been taken. Before adverting to the distinguishing features pointed out byShri Gupta, with reference to the cases relied on by learned counsel for the Department, we shallfirst refer to those cases on which reliance by Shri Gupta has been placed in support of hiscontentions.23. The first of such cases is CIT v. Maskara Tea Estate [1981] 130 ITR 955 (Gauhati). In that case, ithas been held that Clause (i), particularly the Explanation to that clause, as inserted by the 1974amendment, has to be read along with Clause (a) of Sub-section (1) of Section 271 of the Act in orderto find out as to whether a registered firm was liable to penalty or not. The ratio decidendi of thatcase is that the connotation of the term "liable to penalty" was that it is only in those cases wherethere was some outstanding assessed tax which had not been paid by the assessee and the assesseehad also committed a default in filing the return as contemplated by Clause (a) of Sub-section (1) ofSection 271 of the Act that the said assessee could be liable to penalty. The submission made bylearned counsel for the Department in that case that the provisions of Section 271(1)(i) and 271(1)(ii)only prescribe the method of computation of penalty and none of them was a charging provision andconsequently they could not be relied on while determining the question as to whether theunregistered firm was liable to penalty or not, was held to be without any substance. According tothat decision, once it was found that there was no assessed tax payable by the registered firm, therewould be no liability of penalty notwithstanding the fact that the said firm had made a default insubmitting its return.24. The next case on which reliance was placed by learned counsel for the assessee was CIT v.Ganesh Das Sreeram (Firm) [1983] 141 ITR 946. This decision is also of the Gauhati High Court aswas the decision in case of Maskara Tea Estate [1981 ] 130 ITR 955. The principle laid down in thesaid case of Maskara Tea Estate was reiterated in this case also.25. Reliance was then placed by Shri Gupta on the decision of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in P.Venkata Krishnayya Naidu and Son v. CIT [1984] 150 ITR 545. The decision of the Gauhati HighCourt in the case of Maskara Tea Estate [1981] 130 ITR 955 has been followed by the AndhraPradesh High Court also. Further, dealing with the respective submissions made by learned counselfor the parties, it was held in this case that the scheme to impose penalty in respect of acts ofomission and commission falling separately in terms of Clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Sub-section (1) ofSection 271 of the Act was, entirely distinguishable. The concept of "assessed tax" applicable to thelevy of penalty under Section 271(1)(a) was not applicable to the penalties imposable under Clauses(ii) and (iii) of Section 271(1). This aspect must be clearly borne in mind. It was pointed out thatthere could be little doubt that an assessee was bound to file his return of income even though hehad paid more tax than was required with reference to his income. If he failed to file the return, hewill suffer the consequences elsewhere provided in the Act. However, having regard to the scheme ofCommissioner Of Income-Tax vs Bhabuti Contractor on 13 March, 1987Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1594390/7the Act and the distinct provisions governing the levy of penalty for the acts of, omission andcommission on the part of the assessee falling under Clauses (a), (b) and (c), a person was not liableto penalty automatically on the Income-tax Officer's deriving satisfaction as per Clauses (a), (b) and(c).26. Reliance was then placed by Shri Gupta on a decision of the Rajasthan High Court in Addl. CITv. Surana and Co. [1985] 151 ITR 775, After referring to the provisions of Section 271(1) of the Act, itwas held as under (at pages 780, 781) :"Adverting to the facts of the present case, if the amount paid by the assessee by way of tax as aresult of the provisional assessment proceedings was not taken into consideration while determiningthe amount of 'assessed tax', then it is not disputable that some amount was payable by the assesseeby way of tax at the time when the demand notice was issued and as such penalty was leviable uponthe assessee. In that event, applying the provisions of Sub-section (2) of Section 271, the quantum ofpenalty imposable upon the assessee has to be calculated on the basis of tax payable by the assesseeas if it were an unregistered firm. As the amended provisions of Section 271(1)(a)(i) have beenbrought into force with retrospective effect from April 1, 1962, the cancellation of the penalty by theTribunal cannot be upheld. In view of the amended provisions of the Act, the amount of penaltywhich was determined by the Income-tax Officer, on the basis that the assessee had failed to file thereturn of its total income within the time specified in Section 139(1) without reasonable cause,appears to be justified. As penalty was imposable upon the assessee, the provisions of Section271(1)(a)(i) shall have to be read along with the provisions of Section 271(2) and the quantum ofpenalty has to be worked out on the assessed income after treating the assessee-firm as anunregistered firm for the purpose of quantification of the amount of penalty imposable upon it."27. Now, we shall refer to that part of the submission made by Shri Gupta whereby he has made anattempt to distinguish the cases relied on by learned counsel for the Department. In regard to thedecision of the Madras High Court in Kandaswami Weaving Factory and Co.'s case [1977] 110 ITR84, it was urged by Shri Gupta that the said decision has to be read in the light of the distinctionbrought out by the same High Court in CIT v. Fomra Brothers [1980] 122 ITR 312, where it was heldthat the case reported in Kandaswami Weaving Factory and Co.'s case [1977] 110 ITR 84 was onewhere payment was made not as advance tax under Chapter XVII-C but before the penalty orderand consequently, the Explanation appended to Clause (i) was not attracted to the facts of that case.According to Shri Gupta, it is this distinguishing feature on account of which the decision of theMadras High Court in Kandaswami Weaving Factory and Co.'s case [1977] 110 ITR 84 was of noassistance to the Department.28. As regards the decisions of the Division Bench of this court in Todarmal Safarishmal Lashkar'scase [1979] 118 ITR 759 and Chotelal Kanhaiylal's case [1971] 80 ITR 656, it was urged by ShriGupta that these were cases where the relevant assessment year was 1958-59. According to him, atthat time, Section 271(1) of the Act, as amended by the 1974 amending Act, was not in existence and,consequently, the provisions of Clause (i), including its Explanation, never came up forconsideration in those cases and, as such, those cases cannot be treated as authority for theinterpretation of Section 271(1) of the Act after its amendment by the 1974 amending Act.Commissioner Of Income-Tax vs Bhabuti Contractor on 13 March, 1987Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1594390/829. With regard to CIT v. R. Ochhavlal and Co. [1976] 105 ITR 518 (Guj), it was pointed out by ShriGupta that it was a case under Clause (c) of Sub-section (1) of Section 271 and not under Clause (a)thereof. The further distinguishing feature which was highlighted by Shri Gupta was that it wasClause (iii) and not Clause (i) which came up or consideration in that case. According to him, in thisview of the matter, any observation that may have been made in that case with regard to theinterpretation of Clause (a) or (i) of Sub-section (1) of Section 271 of the Act was merely obiter andcould not be treated as an authority for interpreting these two clauses.30. With regard to Priya Gopal Bishoyee's case [1981] 127 ITR 778 (Cal), it was pointed out by ShriGupta that in that case, the return was due on October 1, 1963, with the result that the tax shouldhave been paid prior to that date. However, as was apparent from the decision, the tax was paid onSeptember 20, 1967, i.e., about four years later. The said tax obviously could not be treated aspayment of advance tax. Consequently, the Explanation to Clause (i) of Sub-section (1) of Section271 was not attracted and in this view of the matter, that authority cannot be treated as one layingdown the law in regard to the interpretation of the Explanation appended to Clause (i) ofSub-section (1) of Section 271 of the Act.31. The decision of the Supreme Court in S.V. Angidi Chettiar's case [1962] 44 ITR 739 wasdistinguished by Shri Gupta on the ground that it was a case dealing with Section 28 of the Act of1922 and neither Clause (i) of Sub-section (1) of Section 271 nor its Explanation came up forconsideration before the Supreme Court in that case.32. The decision of the Supreme Court in Maya Rani Punj's case [ 1986 ] 157 ITR 330 wasdistinguished by Shri Gupta on the ground that, in that case, the year of assessment was 1961-62.According to him, even on the merits, the only thing which was held in that case was that the defaultof non-filing of return would be a continuing default. It was further pointed out by Shri Gupta that itwas not a case of a registered firm. Shri Gupta also placed reliance on the observations made in para19 of the report in that case that if there was default, penalty could be imposed only if there wassanction of law.33. On a conspectus of the various decisions referred to above, what emerges is that there areapparently two views which have found favour with regard to the interpretation of Section 271(1)(a)and Sub-section (2) of that Section in the matter of imposition of penalty vis-a-vis a registered firm.One view is that for determining the question whether a registered firm was liable to penalty, onlyClauses (a), (b) and (c) of Sub-section (1) of Section 271 had to be looked into inasmuch as theyconstitute that part of Section 271 which, so to speak, could be referred to as the charging provisionand that Clause (i) was only a provision in regard to quantification of the amount of penalty. Thedecisions taking this view go on to hold that the effect of Sub-section (2) of Section 271 was that ifthe assessee who had made a default in filing the return was a registered firm, then, for purposes ofdetermining the liability to penalty and its amount, it had to he treated that the firm was anunregistered firm. In other words, in order to find out, for the purposes of penalty, as to what wouldbe the amount of assessed tax of the said registered firm, it is not the assesseed tax on the basis thatit was a registered firm which would be relevant, but it is the tax which would have been assessedtreating it to be an unregistered firm which would be relevant. Consequently, according to theseCommissioner Of Income-Tax vs Bhabuti Contractor on 13 March, 1987Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1594390/9decisions, notwithstanding the provisions contained in the Explanation appended to Clause (i) ofSub-section (1) of Section 271, the moment there was a default in filing the return without anysufficient cause, a liability to penalty immediately accrued and reference to Clause (i) of Sub-section(1) of Section 271 of the Act together with its Explanation could be made only for purposes ofquantifying the amount of penalty.34. The other view is that even for purposes of finding out as to whether a registered firm was liableto penalty, there were two conditions precedent. Firstly, that the registered firm had, withoutsufficient cause, failed to file the return as contemplated by Clause (a) of Sub-section (1) of Section271 of the Act. Secondly, there was some outstanding "assessed tax" calculated in accordance withthe Explanation to Clause (i) of the said sub-section which had not been paid by the registered firm.According to this view, if the second condition aforesaid was lacking, mere non-filing of the returnwould not attract any liability to penalty.35. Having given our anxious consideration, we are of the opinion that even though it is true that thedecisions which are rendered in reference made under the taxing statutes whereunder the courtexercises advisory jurisdiction have to be read in the circumstances and on the facts of thatparticular case, but, on that ground alone, the enunciation of law in regard to the provisionsconsidered in those cases cannot just be ignored. In the background referred to above, the questionwhich falls for consideration is as to whether there is any good ground on the basis of whichdecisions of this court of three Division Benches which find support from the observations of theSupreme Court in the cases already referred to above, are capable of being ignored by us on theground that there are some distinguishing features therein as urged by learned counsel for theassessee. In our opinion, there is no good ground for doing so.36. While interpreting a provision which deals with penalty, it cannot be lost sight of that the mainpurpose of such a provision is to ensure compliance with the provisions of the Act. Filing of a returnwithin the relevant time, as contemplated by the Act, is one of the requirements of the Act. Clause(a) of Sub-section (1) of Section 271 of the Act was apparently enacted to ensure compliance with therequirement of the return being filed within the prescribed period.37. From a perusal of the decisions in Chotelal Kanhaiylal's case [1971] 80 ITR 656 (MP) and in JainBros., case [1970] 77 ITR 107 (SC), it is apparent that registered firms were sought to be placed on afooting different from other assessees for a valid reason which has already been indicated above. Itseems that, on account of the benefits available to a registered firm, Parliament intended to take amore stringent view in the matter of imposition of penalty if it was a case of a registered firm.Imposing of penalty cannot be made to depend on the payability of the tax. There may be caseswhere even though liability to penalty may have accrued, but on account of certain circumstances inthe ultimate analysis, no penalty or a nominal penalty may be levied. Simply because, ultimately, atthe stage of quantification of the amount of penalty, no penalty may be payable, it cannot be saidthat the provision making a person liable to penalty on the ground of default committed by him, isto be treated as otiose on that ground. If such a view is taken, it would encourage violation of theprovisions of Clause (a) of Sub-section (1) of Section 271 by a registered firm on the pretext that theadvance tax which, according to it, was payable had been paid and, consequently, it was not at allCommissioner Of Income-Tax vs Bhabuti Contractor on 13 March, 1987Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1594390/10necessary for it to file any return. This obviously would militate against the very purpose for whichClause (a) of Sub-section (1) of Section 271 of the Act had been enacted.38. In the normal course, in a statute dealing with imposition of penalty on the ground of default incompliance with the provisions of that Act, each default is to be visited with penalty. If the intentionof Parliament in substituting Clause (i) in Sub-section (1) of Section 271 of the Act by the 1974Amending Act was that the provisions contained therein together with the Explanation appendedthereto were to be treated as provisions enabling a registered firm not to file a returnnotwithstanding the specific provision contained in this behalf in Clause (a) of Sub-section (1) ofSection 271 of the Act, there was nothing to inhibit Parliament from specifically making a provisionin this behalf either by adding a proviso or Explanation to Clause (a) of Sub-section (1) of Section271 itself. This was, however, not done.39. It has not been seriously disputed by learned counsel for the assessee that, prior to theamendment of Section 271 by the 1974 amending Act, the mere default in compliance with any of theprovisions contained in Clauses (a), (b) or (c) of Sub-section (1) of Section 271 of the Act wassufficient to visit the assessee with penal consequences. If any change in this established rule ofinterpretation was contemplated to be made by Parliament while enacting the Amending Act of1974, which would have had the effect of making a departure from the established interpretation inregard to penalty provisions contained in Section 271 and even in regard to the correspondingpenalty provision in the 1922 Act, it was expected that a specific provision should have been mademaking the intention of Parliament clear and not to leave the matter to varying interpretations. Inthis background, in our opinion, it is apparent that it was never intended while enacting theAmending Act that Clause (i), together with its Explanation, was to be read as an exception to Clause(a) of Sub-section (1) of Section 271 of the Act.40. As is apparent from the decision of the Supreme Court in CIT v. Vegetable Products Ltd. [1973]88 ITR 192, there was a divergence, of opinion among various High Courts on the question as towhether, while computing the assessed tax, any amount which had been paid as advance tax at thestage of provisional assessment, could be adjusted or not. To us, it appears that, while incorporatingthe Explanation to Clause (i), Parliament intended to make it clear that, at the stage ofquantification of penalty with reference to the amount of assessed tax, payments contemplated bythe Explanation had to be adjusted. The object of inserting the Explanation in Clause (i) cannotobviously be treated to be one to assist and entitle a registered firm to ignore with impunity theprovisions of Clause (a) of Sub-section (1) of Section 271 of the Act in the matter of filing a returnwhich was one of the purposes of the Act.41. In this view of the matter, our answer to the question referred to us in M.C.C. No. 43 of 1983 isthat, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and on a proper construction of Section 271(2)of the Act, the Tribunal was not correct in law in upholding the cancellation of penalty by theAppellate Assistant Commissioner under Section 271(1)(a) of the Act. Likewise, our answer to thequestion referred to us in M.C.C. No. 97 of 1983 is that, on the facts and in the circumstances of thecase, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal was not correct in law in cancelling the penalty levied underSection 271(1)(a) of the Income-tax Act, 1961. In other words, the question referred to us in each ofCommissioner Of Income-Tax vs Bhabuti Contractor on 13 March, 1987Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1594390/11these two cases is answered in the negative, i.e., in favour of the Department and against theassessee.42. Before parting with the case, we may point out that the Tribunal, in its order in making thereference in M.C.C. No. 97 of 1983, has pointed out as under :"However, the case has not been decided by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner on merits and ifthe reference application is decided against the assessee, an opportunity will have to be given to theassessee to argue on merits the issues raised before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner."43. The merits of the case shall, therefore, be decided in the instant case in the light of theobservations already made by the Tribunal referred to above. In the circumstances of the case, thereshall be no order as to costs.Commissioner Of Income-Tax vs Bhabuti Contractor on 13 March, 1987Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1594390/12