Patna High CourtShamsher Bahadur Saxena And Ors. vs The State Of Bihar on 3 August, 1955Equivalent citations: AIR 1956 Pat 404, 1955 (3) BLJR 537, 1956 CriLJ 1220Author: R K PrasadBench: Banerji, R K PrasadJUDGMENT Raj Kishore Prasad, J.1. This is an appeal on behalf of ten persons, who, along with nine others, were put on trial beforeMr. Gouri Shankar Prasad Sinha, 1st Assistant Sessions Judge at Muzaffarpur, for offences underSections 120B, 366 and 368, Penal Code. Out of these 19 persons who were on trial, one of them wasRamautar Nonia, who was charged only under Section 366, Penal Code, and he was acquitted andthe present appellants, except appellant Sarbasia Tatmain, were convicted under Sections 120B and368, Penal Code, whereas Mosammat Sarbasia Tatmain was convicted under Sections 120B and363, Penal Code.Appellants 1 to 4, viz., Shamsher Bahadur Saxena, Maharaj Bahadur Saxena alias Laloo, RamgulamVerma and Dayanand Singh alias Munji were each sentenced to six years' rigorous imprisonmentunder Section 368, Penal Code; appellants 5 to 8, viz. Asharfi Jha, Bhikhari Sonar, Bengali Sah andRamnandan Kahar alias Mandan Kahar were each sentenced to four years' rigorous imprisonmentunder Section 368, appellant 9 Rajmangal Devi was sentenced to two years' rigorous imprisonmentunder Section 368 and appellant 10 Sarbasia Tatmain was sentenced to two years' rigorousimprisonment both under Sections 120B and 366, but her sentences were to run concurrently.Appellants 1 to 9 were not awarded any separate sentence under Section 120B, because each one ofthem had already been sentenced to various terms of imprisonment under Section 368.2. In August, 1951, investigation of G.P.B.S. No. 11(4) of 1951 was ordered to be reopened, andaccordingly Sub-Inspector Habibullah Khan took charge of that case on 29-9-1951. After reading thecase diary of that case, and contacting the spies, he came to know that appellants 1 and 2, viz., Lalooand Shamsher, along with several other persons of other places, visited North Bihar Abla AnathAshram at Laheriasaria on 30-9-51, and searched on 1-10-51 the Abla Anatri Ashram and recoveredtwo letters (Exs. 20 and 20-A), and the contents of those letters corroborated the information whichhe had got from the spies, and consequently he started for Muzaffarpur.After reaching Muzaffarpur he contacted the Officer-in-charge of the town thana on 3-10-51, andrequested him to depute some body to help him in the investigation. J. N. Chatterjee Sub-Inspector,P. W. 92, and some constables were deputed to help him. All of them went to Bhartiya AnathAshram in Tinkutia and raided it. He recovered certain papers after search in presence of certainwitnesses on that day and scrutinized them.The next day, that is, on 4-1-51, he again went to the Ashram and searched it, as the search on thefirst day was not finished, and recovered some more papers from there. He, along with M. N. Jha,Sub-Inspector, town thana (P. W. 81) who had also been in the meantime deputed to help him in theinvestigation by the Officer-in-charge of the police-station, went inside the Ashram and found 29girls and women in that Ashram.Shamsher Bahadur Saxena And Ors. vs The State Of Bihar on 3 August, 1955Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/595572/1M. N. Jha was directed to take down statements of those girls as they were found weeping. He,therefore, recorded the statements of those girls and women; and the first girl, viz., Dukhni, P. W. 1,who was examined by him disclosed a cognizable offence, and consequently her statement, Ex. 17,was treated as fardbeyan, on which a formal first information report, Ex. 17/a, was drawn up. As thecase was within the jurisdiction of town police station so M. N. Jha started investigation andSub-Inspector (P. W. 19) began to assist him till the investigation of the case came in his charge on4-12-51, and he after completing the investigation submitted charge-sheet against these appellantsand others on 4-2-52.3. The case of the prosecution as disclosed in the fard-beyan of Dukhni, P. W. 1, is that she wasmarried to Ramchander Soori of Sitamarhi four years ago. 27 or 28 days before the date of the firstinformation report, at about 8 a.m., she had gone from her house to take her bath in river Lakhnideiwith a Sari and a Iota. There she met Sarbasia accused, the mother of Sunma, who, was a resident ofMahalla Puranibazar. Sarbasia advised Dukhni that she should marry somebody else, because shewas often beaten by her Sasural people.Dukhni at first did not agree, but after much persuasion and temptation she agreed to go to thehouse of her Nandosi at Muzaffarpur for a short time. Dukhni was brought by Sarbasia to Sitamarhirailway station and then by train to Muzaffarpur, where she was taken to the house of Shamsheraccused. In the evening, after dark, Dukhni was taken by Shamsher and his wife to the BhartiyaAnath Ashram, from where she was recovered.It is alleged by Dukhni that Shamsher, Lallu, Deonandan alias Muniji, Pitaji, namely, Ram-gulamVerma, Didi Rajmangal, besides others were keeping wrongfully confined many other girls in theAshram and Dukhni named some of those girls in her first information. Dukhni further stated thatshe wanted to go to her Nandosi, Ajodhya Sha, but she was not allowed to go by the aforesaidaccused persons, and was always kept confined in the Ashram, and the accused Bhikhari andBengali, the servants of the Ashram, were keeping watch over her and the other girls.It is further alleged that the aforesaid accused persons used to threaten the girls with assault if theywanted to make any trouble and consequently they always kept quiet. It is said that these appellantsand accused Dr. Satnarain and Nandkumar who were also working in the Ashram and who havesince been acquitted, use to keep concealed and confined the abducted and kidnapped girls, who useto be brought in the Ashram The names of some of these girls were changed in the Ashram andduring her stay in the Ashram six girls were sold on the pretext of their marriage. It is further saidthat the aforesaid accused persons used to keep agents for abducting and kidnapping girls andbringing them to the Ashram.The prosecution case was that there was a conspiracy amongst the appellants and the other accusedpersons, who have been acquitted, and in pursuance of that conspiracy young girls used to beabducted and kidnapped and brought to the Ashram for being sold on taking large sums of money.The police after recovering the abducted girls from the Ashram kept them in the Ashram of KuberSingh that very town, after recording their statements.Shamsher Bahadur Saxena And Ors. vs The State Of Bihar on 3 August, 1955Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/595572/24. The appellants pleaded not guilty to the charges framed against them, and stated that they hadbeen falsely implicated at the instance of Kuber Singh out of enmity, because he was also running asimilar Ashram. The appellants' further defence was that their joint trial with Ramautar, who hadbeen charged only under Section 365, Penal Code, and not also for conspiracy under Section 120B,has vitiated the whole trial, as such joint trial is illegal and this defect is incurable.5. As stated before, 29 abducted or kidnapped girls were recovered from the Ashram, of whom 9,viz., P. Ws. 1, 11, 14, 20, 21, 22, 29, 30 & 39 were examined and some were tendered. The learnedSessions Judge found P. Ws. 1, 11, 14, 21 and 39 as having been abducted and P. W. 29 as kidnapped,and further found that P. Ws. 20, 22 and 30 were not abducted girls. The trial was held with the aidof four assessors.All of them unanimously found the appellants 1, 2, 4 and 5 guilty and the appellants 3 and 6 to 10not guilty under all the charges against them. Ninety-two witnesses were examined, and out of them32 were tendered. The learned Assistant Sessions Judge, in a very careful and well-consideredjudgment, has, after consideration of the entire evidence, both oral and documentary, convicted theappellants, and acquitted others as stated before.6. Mr. B. P. Samaiyar, who has appeared for the appellants, has challenged the legality of the trialitself on the ground of misjoinder of charges. The substance of his argument is that while Ramautarwas charged only under Section 336, Penal Code, all others, including the appellants, were chargedunder Section 120B, Penal Code, and, therefore, it is contended that a Joint trial of all these personsfor the two offences charged is illegal, and, consequently, the trial is vitiated.He contends that the charge against Ramautar Nonia under Section 366, Penal Code, was forabducting Mossammat Monia, P. W. 10, wife of Siri Mahto, P. W. 8, of Sitamarhi from her father'shouse at Bargenia to one Bihar Shadi Karyalaya, Muzaffarpur, as appears from Ex. A, the receiptgranted by Siri Mahto (alias Shiva Nonia), P. W. 8, the husband, to the Manager, Bihar ShadiKaryalaya, at the time of taking away his wife, Mania, also known as Phulkumari.He contends, therefore, that, as the Bihar Shadi Karyalaya, Muzaffarpur, has had nothing to do withthe Bhartiya Anath Ashram of the accused, the offences committed in respect of P. W. 10 and P. W. 1and others, who were recovered from the Bhartiya Anath Ashram, are two distinct offences inrespect of two distinct transactions relating to places and time, and as such they could not be said tohave been committed in course of one and the same transaction so as to be covered by Section239(a), Criminal P. C., and tried together, and, therefore, the joint trial was wholly illegal.He relies on Section 233, Criminal P. C. and submits that, as this section provides for every distinctoffence, of which any person is accused, there shall be a separate charge and every such charge shallbe tried separately; therefore, there should have been separate trials in respect of the two charges,inasmuch as the present case was not covered by any of the exceptions contained in Sections 234,235, 236 and 239, Criminal P. C. Mr. Shyam Nandan Prasad Singh, the learned Standing Counselappearing for the State, however, relies on Section 239 (a), Criminal P. C., and contends that jointtrial is covered by this section, inasmuch as the offence under Section 366, Penal Code, for whichShamsher Bahadur Saxena And Ors. vs The State Of Bihar on 3 August, 1955Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/595572/3Ramautar Nonia was charged, was in the course of the 'same transaction' in which the other offencestook place and for which the other accused were charged under Sections 120B and 368, Penal Code.We have, therefore, to see if the present case is covered By Section 239(a), Criminal P. C. (7) Mr.Samaiyar has argued that, if mis-joinder of charges is established, the trial must be deemed illegal,because held contrary to an express provisions of the law relating to the mode of a trial, and,therefore, such a defect will not be a mere irregularity so as to be curable under Section 537(a),Criminal P. C.In support of this, he has relied on Subramania Iyer v. King-Emperor, 28 Ind App 257 (A), wheretheir Lordships of the Judicial Committee observed : "Their Lordships are unable to regard thedisobedience to an express provision as to a mode of trial as a mere irregularity. Their Lordships inthat case were considering whether there had been contravention of Section 234, Criminal P. C. Thenext case relied upon in this connection is Kottaya v. Emperor, 1947 PC 67 (AIR V 34) (B), In thiscase Sir John Beaumont while considering the effect of the breach of Section 162, Criminal P. C.,observed as follows :"When a trial is conducted in a manner different from that prescribed by the Code (as in 28 Ind App257 (A)) the trial is bad, and no question of curing an irregularity arises; but if the trial is conductedsubstantially in the manner prescribed by the Code, but some irregularity occurs in the course ofsuch conduct, the irregularity can be cured under Section 537, and none the less so because theirregularity involves, as must nearly always be the case, a breach of one or more of the verycomprehensive provisions of the Code.The distinction drawn in many of the cases in India between an illegality and an irregularity is oneof degree rather than of kind. This view finds support in the decision of their Lordships' Board in thecase of Abdul Rahman v. Emperor, 1927 PC 44 (AIR V 14) (Bl), where failure to comply with Section360, Criminal P. C., was held to be cured by Sections 535 and 537. The present case falls underSection 637, and their Lordships hold the trial valid notwithstanding the breach of Section 162."The next case relied upon is Nabijan v. Emperor, 1947 Pat 212 (AIR V 34) (C), in which Meredith J,which considering the effect of mis joinder of charges, or as his Lordship says, misjoinder of offencesin the same trial, relied upon Subrahmania Iyer's case (A), referred to above, and said :"Lord Halsbury having clearly said that disobedience to the provisions of Section 233 (of course readsubject to its exceptions) cannot be cured under Section 537, it is, in my opinion, not open to anyCourt in this country, unless and until the Privy Council itself gives a decision to the contrary, tohold that such a disobedience is so curable. I respectfully disagree with those decisions in whichmisjoinder of offences in the same trial has been held so curable."Very recently their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the case of Aftab Ahmad Khan v. The State ofHyderabad, 1954 SC 433 (AIR V 41) (D), had to consider the effect of misjoinder of charges and theeffect of the contravention of the mandatory provisions of Section 233, Criminal P. C.Shamsher Bahadur Saxena And Ors. vs The State Of Bihar on 3 August, 1955Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/595572/4In considering this question his Lordship Ghulam Hasan J. who delivered the judgment of theCourt, while considering the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that where there isdisobedience of an express provision as to a mode of trial contained in Section 233 the trial is whollyvitiated and the accused is not bound to show that the misjoinder has caused any prejudice to him,referred to four decisions of the Privy Council, namely, 28 Ind App 257 (A), Abdul Rahman v.Emperor, 1927 PC 44 (AIR V 14) (E), Babulal Chaukhani v. King-Emperor, 1938 PC 130 (AIR V 25)(F) and 1947 PC 67 (AIR V 34) (B) and observed that the Privy Council in Babulal Chaukhani's case(S), referred to above, treated an infringement of Section 239(d) as an illegality vitiating the trialunder the rule stated in Subramania lyer's case (A), as contrasted with the result of irregularity asJaid in Abdul Rahman's case (13).But his Lordship said that as the case before him was not under Section 233 of the Code, therefore,it was unnecessary to consider whether the violation of its provisions amount to an illegalityvitiating the trial altogether, or it is a mere irregularity which can be condoned under Section 537.8. I, therefore, held that disobedience to the provisions of Section 233, Criminal P. C., cannot becured under Section 537, and that misjoinder of offences is an illegality which vitiates the wholetrial, unless the same can be brought under the purview of some clause of Section 239, Criminal P.C.9. The real question in controversy, therefore, is whether there has been misjoinder of charges in thecase before us. It has been contended by Mr. Samaiyar that Section 239(a) does not apply to thepresent case inasmuch as, although the offence committed by Ramautar Nonia and the presentaccused may be the same, but certainly it was not committed in the course of the same transaction.Several authorities have been cited by him in order to explain what is the meaning of the words "thesame transaction", which are to be found in Section 239 (a), Criminal P. C. The words the sametransaction" are also to be found in Section 239(d), Criminal P. C., and, therefore, the decisions onSection 239 (d) may be of great use in considering what is the meaning of the words "the sametransaction" which have been used in Section 239(a) also.The first case relied upon by him is Amritalal Hazra v. Emperor, 1916 Cal 188 (AIR V 3) (G) in whichMookerjee J. referred to several judicial decisions in which the expression "the same transaction"had been interpreted, and said :"It is not possible to frame a comprehensive formula of universal application to determine whethertwo or more acts constitute the same transaction; but circumstances which must bear on thedetermination of the question in an individual case may be easily indicated; they are, 'proximity oftime, unity or proximity of place, continuity of action, and community of purpose or design'"(underlined (here in ' ' -- Editor) by me.10. In this case his Lordship was considering Section 239(d), Criminal P. C. The next case reliedupon is Harshnath Chatterjee v. Emperor, 1915 Cal 719 (AIR V 2) (H) in which while considering thescope of Section 239, Criminal P. C., Beachcroft J. said as follows :Shamsher Bahadur Saxena And Ors. vs The State Of Bihar on 3 August, 1955Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/595572/5"The argument was that the possession of firearms is a totally distinct offence from the offence ofconspiracy to manufacture arms, and as the offence of conspiracy Is complete so soon as the personsconspiring have formed a common intention, the two offences cannot be said to have beencommitted In the same transaction. The fallacy in this argument is that it assumes that thetransaction is complete as soon as an offence is committed, in other words, that the term transactionis synonymous with the term 'offence'. It is clear that so long as the conspiracy continued, thetransaction, which began with the forming of the common intention, continued, and the first twooffences charged were committed in the course of this transaction".In Babulal Chaukhani (F), referred to above, their Lordships of the Judicial Committee consideredthe provisions of Section 239(d), Criminal P. C. and Lord Wright, in delivering the judgment of theBoard, observed :"Whatever scope of connotation may be included in the words 'the same transaction' it is enough forthe present case to say that if several persons conspire to commit offences, and commit overt acts inpursuance of the conspiracy (a circumstance which makes the act of one the act of each and all theconspirators) these acts are committed in the course of the same transaction, which embraces theconspiracy and the acts done under it. The common concert and agreement which constitute theconspiracy, serve to unify the acts done in pursuance of it".His Lordship held that the relevant point of time in the proceedings at which the condition as tosameness of transaction must be fulfilled is the time of accusation and not that of eventual result.Two Patna cases have also been cited at the Bar. The first case is Ajablal v. Emperor, 1936 Pat 20(AIR V 23) (I), in which the words "the same transaction" have been construed and an attempt hasbeen made to find out what should be considered the "same transaction". In this case Verma J.observed as follows :"The expression 'same transaction' has not been defined in the Criminal Procedure Code, and it isperhaps not desirable to attempt to frame any precise definition and not safe to lay down any singletest of what 'one transaction' means".His Lordship referred to Queen-Empress v. Fakirappa, 15 Bom 491 (J), in which it was pointed outthat proximity of time and place was not essential. His Lordship also referred to the case of Emperorv. Datto Hanmant, 30 Bom 49 (K), in which the above observations were applied, and in which itwas said that continuity of purpose rather than proximity of time, was the real test.His Lordship observed that in some later decisions the observations made in Emperor v. DattoHanmant (K) have been read as implying that identity of purpose was the sole test, and that in theabsence of complete identity of purpose among the parties to an incident it will not be deemed to beone transaction. His Lordship summed up his observation as follows :"It seems to me that any of the matters set forth in 15 Bom 491 (J) may in the circumstances of aparticular case -- the events under consideration -- form one transaction; and all these matters areproperly to be considered in deciding whether it is so or not. It is after all a question of fact in eachShamsher Bahadur Saxena And Ors. vs The State Of Bihar on 3 August, 1955Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/595572/6particular case".In this case his Lordship, with whom Rowland J. agreed, held that the various acts of the accusedwhich brought about his escape from lawful custody of the petitioner Ajablal Rai formed part of thesame transaction as contemplated by Section 239 (d), Criminal P. C., and, therefore, the joint trial ofall the accused was legal. The second case relied upon is the case of Nabijah v. Emperor (C), alreadyreferred to, in which Bennett, J. referred to Babulal Chaukhani (F) and to several other cases on thepoint and summed up as follows :"To sum up, therefore, both upon the plain and ordinary meaning of the words used respectively inSections 235(1) and 239(d), Criminal P. C., and upon consideration of the relevant authorities, theword 'the same transaction' in Section 235(1), Criminal P. C., comprise all the acts of the personconcerned which are done in one series in the course of carrying through the affair in question, orwhich are in direct and immediately casual or circumstantial relation thereto, and the prima' facietest, as the words 'in one series of acts so connected as to form' indicate, where the connectionbetween the acts is that of purpose, is a certain degree of continuity of action, the degree varyingwith the nature of the purpose and the circumstances of the acts of all the persons concerned donein the acts is causal or circumstantial, is a direct continuity of action; whereas in Section 239(d),Criminal P. C., the words 'the same transaction' comprise all the acts of all the persons concerneddone in the course of carrying through the affair in question, and the prima facie test, as the words'in the course of indicate, is community and continuity of purpose".Meredith J. in the above case, however, reserved his opinion as to what are the essentials of Section239(d), Criminal P. C. He observed:"The two incidents were, in my opinion, so connected, both by community and continuity ofpurpose, and community and continuity of action, as to form part of the same transaction bothwithin the meaning of Sections 235 and 239, Criminal P. C. That being so, it is unnecessary for thepurpose of this case to decide whether the difference in the wording of the two sections is reallysignificant, whether in short, continuity of action is enough for Section 235(1) without continuity ofpurpose, and whether community and continuity of purpose is enough for Section 239 (d) withoutcontinuity of action. Therefore, I will content myself with saying that, as at present advised, I aminclined to agree with the view of my learned brother as to the exact significance of each form ofexpression and the distinction between them but until I have to, I do not want to express a finalview".Their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Aftab Ahmad Khan (D), referred to above, considered theprovisions of Sections 233 and 235, Criminal P. C. His Lordship Ghulam Hasan J. who delivered theJudgment of the Court, observed as follows:"Section 233 embodies the general law as to the joinder of charges and lays down a rule that forevery distinct offence there should be a separate charge and every such charge should be triedseparately. There is no doubt that the object of Section 233 is to save the accused from beingembarrassed in his defence if distinct offences are lumped together in one charge or in separateShamsher Bahadur Saxena And Ors. vs The State Of Bihar on 3 August, 1955Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/595572/7charges and are tried together, taut the Legislature has engrafted certain exceptions upon this rulecontained in Sections 234, 236 and 239".His Lordship held that no question of contravention of any express provision of the Act, such asSection 233, arose, because the fact that the offence of extortion was committed at a different placeand at a different time it does not any the less make the act as one committed in the course of thesame transaction. The above cases as well as some other cases were all reviewed recently by aDivision Bench of this Court in State of Bihar v. Ramautar Singh, reported in 1956 Pat 10 ( (S) AIR V43) (L).Sahai J. who gave the main judgment of the Court, held that there was sufficient community ofpurpose, continuity of action, and proximity of time so as to constitute the entire series of factscommitted by the appellant before him into one transaction.10a. On a review of the above cases, I hold that the words 'the same transaction' comprise all the actsof all the persons concerned done in the course of carrying through the affair in question, and thatthe prima facie test, as the words 'in the course of indicate, is community and continuity of purpose.If several persons conspire to commit offences, and commit overt acts in pursuance of theconspiracy (a circumstance which makes the act of one the act of each and all the conspirators) theseacts are committed in the course of the same transaction, which embraces the conspiracy and theacts done under it.The common concert and agreement which constitute the conspiracy, serve to unify the acts done inpursuance of it. There may, or may not, be proximity of time, unity or proximity of place, orcontinuity of action, in all cases; but if there is both community and continuity of purpose or design,all the acts of all the persons concerned done in the course of carrying through the conspiracy or anyother offence, will be considered acts done in the course of one and the same transaction. The words'the same transaction' used in Section 239 (a), Criminal P. C., should therefore, have this meaning.11. Applying these considerations to the facts of the present case, the joint trial of the appellants onthe charge under Section 120B, Penal Code, with Ramautar Nonia in respect of the offence underSection 363, Penal Code, falls to be justified, if at all, under Section 239(a), Criminal P. C. by theexistence of a community and continuity of purpose.11a. I shall now proceed, therefore, to consider how far the facts of the present case justify the jointtrial of the appellants. It will appear from the charge under Section 120B, Penal Code, that theperiod of conspiracy is between 1-1-51 and 4-10-51. From the charge under Section 366, Penal Code,against Ramautar it will appear that the period is between 1/5/51 and 30/6/51, during which it wasalleged Ramautar abducted Mania P. W. 10.The charge-sheet was submitted on 4/2/52 for conspiracy against all the appellants includingRamautar. It would appear, therefore, that Mania was abducted by Ramautar during the periodwithin which the conspiracy is alleged by the prosecution to have been hatched and set on foot, andin pursuance of which several girls and women were either kidnapped or abducted and brought to aShamsher Bahadur Saxena And Ors. vs The State Of Bihar on 3 August, 1955Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/595572/8building known as Lallu's Ashram or Bhartiya Anath Ashram.P. W. 10, Mania, in her evidence has stated that she was brought by Ramautar and Jankia Mallain toMuzaffarpur, who took her to a pucca house, where there was one male, two females and some girls,and she further stated that subsequently she came to know that the name of that male wasShamsher, one of the appellants. It has been mentioned before that during the search by the policemany documents were recovered from the Bhartiya Anath Ashram run by Lallu and Shamsher.Amongst such documents were some letters, Exts. 20 series. One of such letters was dated 10-8-51,Ex. 20/E. This letter is from Bhartiya Anath Ashram in the handwriting of Dayanand, one of theappellants. This letter was proved by P. W. 88. In this letter it has been mentioned that the name ofthe Ashram had been changed into Bhartiya Anath Ashram. This Ashram was in the house ofShamsher as stated by P. Ws. & 10 and 78.The fact that the name of Ramautar accused did not find mention in the Uchant Bahi, Ex. 26, whichwill be considered in detail hereafter, is of no importance when it has been established that theAshram known as Bihar Shadi Karyalay was being run by Shamsher and Laloo in the housebelonging to Shamsher. It also shows that Laloo was treating the Ashram as a place of business inwhich girls of all kinds and ages were practically open for sale.It would appear that the Bihar Shadi Karyalay, Muzaffarpur, as well as Bhartiya Anath Ashram, wereboth run by Laloo and Shamsher under different names. It was, therefore, in pursuance of theconspiracy that whatever happened during the period of that conspiracy namely, 1-1-51 to 4-10-51,v/as done in accordance with community and continuity of purpose, and as such it cannot be saidthat the charge under Section 366 against Ramautar was outside the ambit of this conspiracyunconnected with the present appellants.The contention of Mr. Samaiyar that as the charge under Section 366 against Ramautar is in respectof abduction of Mania from Bihar Shadi Karyalay, which is another Ashram unconnected with thepresent Bhartiya Anath Ashram, must, therefore, fail. This Ramautar In furtherance of the objectiveof the conspiracy had also brought an abducted girl to the said Ashram to keep her in concealment.All the acts complained of, said to be committed by all the accused including Ramautar, were inpursuance of a common design and in all of them there was community and continuity of purpose.In the present case, there was not only community and continuity of purpose, but also continuity ofaction arid proximity of time so as to constitute the entire series of acts committed by the appellants,& the other accused, including Ramautar, into one & the same transaction within the meaning ofSection 239(a), Criminal P. C. I, therefore, hold that the joint trial is perfectly valid, and is coveredby Section 239(a), Criminal P. C.12. On the merits of the case, Mr. Samaiyar's contentions may be summarised thus : (1) the Ashramrun by Shamsher and Laloo was a bona fide Ashram and whatever was done by the appellants wasdone bona fide; (2) no conspiracy had been established amongst, the appellants and as such thecharge under Section 120B, Penal Code, must fail; (3) the evidence of P. Ws. 11, 14, 21, 29 and 39Shamsher Bahadur Saxena And Ors. vs The State Of Bihar on 3 August, 1955Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/595572/9besides being unreliable was also inadmissible in evidence; (4) the charge under Sections 336 and368, Penal Code, against the appellants must also fail, because it had not been established by theprosecution that the kidnapped and abducted girls and women were wrongfully confined, or as amatter of fact kept confined at all; and (5) the appellants had been falsely implicated at the instanceof Kuber Singh, who was on inimical terms with Shamsher.13. As regards the first contention that the Ashram was run on bona fide lines and in ordinary courseof business Mr. Samaiyar has relied strongly on the fact that the Ashram people always tried tocontact the parents, or other guardians of the girls, who used to be brought to the Ashram throughthe police, and made enquiries from the police, if and when necessary, in order to know thewhereabouts of such abducted or kidnapped girls.(After discussing the evidence, his Lordship rejected the contention of Mr. Samaiyar, that theAshram was run in bona fide lines.)14. The second contention of Mr. Samaiyar is that no conspiracy had been established amongst theappellants and as such the charge under Section 120B, Penal Code, must fail. I may at once say thatthe oral and documentary evidence adduced in the present case and which has been mentioned andfully discussed by the learned Assistant Sessions Judge leave no room for doubt that the conspiracywas hatched and completely and effectively carried out.Exhibit 21/a, a reference to which has already been made, shows the object of the formation of theso-called Bhartiya Anath Ashram and also how the first object was given a go-by and this Ashramwas converted into a place for keeping kidnapped and abducted girls. In conspiracy persons areoften required to do various acts at various stages; and if some of them, for the first time, enter intothe conspiracy at a later stage they 'would be deemed to be members of the conspiracy, providedtheir act is calculated to promote the act of the conspiracy.Exhibit 21/a also makes it clear that the accused persons who are named in those proceedingsbecame members of the institution only to carry out their odious design of collecting abducted aridkidnapped girls, married and unmarried, and then marrying them after, taking heavy amount fromthe candidates for the marriage. It appears farther from the evidence of P. Ws. 14, 20, 29 and 30 thatthey indulged in illicit intercourse too under the camouflage of a seemingly pious institution. Suchkind of conspiracy can only be proved by circumstantial evidence.In the present case there is no dearth of such evidence to prove that a conspiracy had been hatchedby the appellants. In the overt acts, as have been proved in this case, there is a clear inference ofagreement and acknowledgment of the purpose of the conspiracy. Exhibit 26, to which a referencehas already been maae, proves how the abducted and kidnapped girls, who have been examined inthe present case, particularly, P. Ws. 1, 11, 14, 21, 29 and 39, were abducted or kidnapped andbrought to the Ashram and kept confined there and later on sold at high prices.15. At this stage I may mention that Ex. 26, the genuineness of which was challenged and has beendealt with by me earlier, was also challenged on the ground that it was inadmissible in evidence. TheShamsher Bahadur Saxena And Ors. vs The State Of Bihar on 3 August, 1955Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/595572/10contention was that Section 10, Evidence Act does not apply to the present case, because unless aconspiracy was proved the entries in Ex. 26, and the facts mentioned therein, will be inadmissible inevidence.It should be remembered that Ex. 26 represents the acts of the accused in the course of actuallycarrying out the conspiracy and not after it was ended, and as such Ex. 26 could be admissible inevidence under Section 10, Evidence Act. A reliance was placed on Reg. v. Blake, (1844) 6 QB 126(M), and on the case of Mirza Akbar v. King-Emperor, 1940 PC 176 (AIR V 27) (N). The leading casein (1844) 5 QB 126 (M) illustrates the two aspects of it because that authority shows both what isadmissible and what is inadmissible. In referring to this case their Lordships of the JudicialCommittee in Mirza Akbar (N) observed as follows:"What in that case was held to be admissible against the conspirator was the evidence of entriesmade by his fellow conspirator contained in various documents actually used for carrying out thefraud. But a document not created in the course of carrying out the transaction, but made by one ofthe conspirators after the fraud was completed, was held to be inadmissible against the other.No doubt what was contained in it amounted to a statement evidencing what had been done andalso the common intent with which at the time it had been done, but it had nothing to do withcarrying the conspiracy into effect. Lord Denman said at p. 138 that the evidence must be rejectedon the principle that a mere statement made by one conspirator to a third party, or any act not donein pursuance of the conspiracy, is not evidence for or against another conspirator."Their Lordships after a consideration of the matter construed Section 10, Evidence Act by observingas follows:"Their Lordships think the words of Section 10 must be construed in accordance with it and are notcapable of being widely construed so as to include a statement made by one conspirator in theabsence of the other with reference to past acts done in the actual course of carrying out theconspiracy after it has been completed. The common intention is in the past. In their Lordships'judgment the words 'common intention' signify a common intention existing at the time when thething was said, done or written by one of them.Things said, done or written while the conspiracy was on foot are relevant as evidence of thecommon intention, once reasonable ground has been shown to believe in its existence. But it wouldbe a very different matter to hold that any narrative or statement or confession made to a third partyafter the common intention or conspiracy was no longer operating and has ceased to exist isadmissible against the other party. There is then no common intention of the conspirators to whichthe statement can have reference. In their Lordships' judgment Section 10 embodies this principle."16. Their Lordships approved the construction which had been applied to Section 10 in some Indiandecisions and said that in these cases the distinction was rightly drawn between, communicationsbetween conspirators while the conspiracy was going on with reference to the carrying out ofconspiracy and statements made, after arrest or after the conspiracy has ended, by way ofShamsher Bahadur Saxena And Ors. vs The State Of Bihar on 3 August, 1955Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/595572/11description of events then past. In the present case Ex. 26 came into existence after the conspiracyhad started and whatever has been mentioned therein has been made by fellow conspirators in thecourse of carrying out the transaction and not after the conspiracy had ended.17. Section 10, Evidence Act deals with 'things said or done by conspirator in reference to commondesign'. Anything said, done or written by any of the conspirators in the course of carrying out theconspiracy or the common intention or design in pursuance of it would be admissible against theother; but if anything is said, done or written by any fellow conspirator after the conspiracy was nolonger operating and had ended on ceased to exist, it will be inadmissible against the other, becausethere is then no common intention or design of the conspirators to which the things said, done orwritten by a fellow conspirator can have any reference, and it had nothing to do with carrying theconspiracy into effect. I, therefore, hold that Ex. 26, on the principles laid down above, is admissiblein evidence.18. The evidence of the witnesses who have been examined on behalf of the prosecution to provehow, when and on what conditions and to whom they were married go to establish that the girlswere given to them after taking a heavy price although a small amount was mentioned in thedocuments of the Ashram.It may be mentioned here that the rokar bahi of the Ashram was not exhibited. P. W. 62 has statedthat he married in Lallu's Ashram; Lallu demanded Rs. 925 from him and at that time Lallu'sbrother, Shamsher, Muniji and Rajendra Jha were present; he paid Rs. 925/- in the hand of Lallubut he got a receipt of Rs. 125/- only and he was asked that in the event of an enquiry he should saythat he paid Rs. 125/- only and not more, and after that he was married to Lakshmi Devi. Manymore witnesses on the point have been examined, for instance, P. W. 86 Saksena married toRajmangali, one of the accused; P. W. 47 married to Rajkali.It may be mentioned here that evidence has been adduced to show that the activities of the Ashramwere not confined only in the Bihar State, but also outside it. P. W. 56, who is a resident of thedistrict of Barailey in U. P. has stated how handbills used to be distributed by a Shadi Karyalayawhich was situated in the Punjabi hotel near Barailey railway junction station and how on gettingsuch a handbill he was asked by his father to enquire about the marriage in the Karyalaya itself. Hestated that he came with P. W. 57 to Samaj Shadi Karyalaya, Barailey, where he met BholanathSingh, one of the accused since acquitted, and he was given a marriage form which he filled up onpayment of Rs. 7/, and thereafter he was told that they should come after getting a letter from him.When they got a letter from Bholanath he took Rs. 150/- from P. W. 56 for expenses and then P. Ws.6 and 7 and Bholanath came to Muzaffarpur and there appellant Shamsher demanded Rs. 370/- asthe price of the girl approved by him. Shamsher and Bholanath then asked P. W. 56 to pay Rs. 870/-which was done and then he was married. There is, "therefore, convincing and reliable evidence onthe record to prove that a regular conspiracy was formed and it was effectively given effect to. I,therefore overrule the contention of the appellants that conspiracy has not been proved.Shamsher Bahadur Saxena And Ors. vs The State Of Bihar on 3 August, 1955Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/595572/1219. The third contention of Mr. Samaiyar is that the depositions of P. Ws. 11, 14, 21, 29 and 39 areunreliable and inadmissible and their evidence should be ignored.20. The first ground on which Mr. Samaiyar says, the evidence of these girls and women should berejected is that no information regarding these girls or women was ever lodged either by them ortheir relations before the police, nor any relation of theirs has been examined to support their storyof abduction or kidnapping, and, that except in the case of Dukhni, P. W. 1, the abductors of thesegirls are not accused.When their evidence has been corroborated by other independent witnesses and reliable documents,as discussed hereafter, there is no reason on this score to reject their evidence. Besides this it is amatter of common knowledge that in such cases guardians or parents do not generally lodge anyinformation to save themselves from disgrace and notoriety, and, therefore, on that account theirevidence cannot be rejected.21. The second objection, which has been very strongly urged by Mr. Samaiyar, is that these girls,namely, P. Ws. 1, 11, 14, 21, 29 and 39, are all accomplices, and, therefore, it was not safe to convictthe accused on their testimony, unless there was corroboration in some material particular of theirtestimony affecting the accused. He relies on the observation of Lord Reading C.J., in the leadingcase of King v. Baskerville, reported in 1916-2 KB 658 (O):"The corroboration must be some evidence other than that of an accomplice, and, therefore, oneaccomplice's evidence is hot corroboration of the testimony of another accomplice".He relies also on Sachinder Rai v. Emperor, 1939 Pat 536 (AIR V 26) (P) for the proposition that it isextremely dangerous, and permissible only in exceptional cases, to convict a man of a sexual offenceon the uncorroborated testimony of the complainant; and that the corroboration must be byindependent evidence coming from another person altogether. In this case the accused had beenconvicted under Sections 366 and 166-A, Penal Code, upon the evidence of the victim alone.Harries O. J. agreed with Meredith J. and observed that this case belonged to that class of cases,commonly referred to as sexual cases; and in such cases it is essential that the learned Judge shouldspecially warn the jury of the danger of convicting upon the uncorroborated testimony of the womanconcerned. His Lordship further said :"It is true that there is no rule of law in this country requiring corroboration, but experience hasshown both in England and in India that it is extremely dangerous in this class of case to act solelyupon the woman's evidence. The rule is a rule of practice, but it has been followed for, such a lengthof time that it has virtually become a rule of law".Meredith J. referred to the Calcutta decisions in Emperor v. Nur Ahmad, 1934 Cal 7 (AIR, V 21) (Q)and in Chamuddin Sardar v. Emperor, 1936 Cal 18 (AIR V 23) (R), and held that failure to warn thejury of the danger of convicting the accused on the girl's evidence ajone amounts to a non-direction,which vitiates the trial. Mr. Samaiyar then relied on Baldeo v. Emperor, 1946 Pat 426 (AIR V 33) (S)Shamsher Bahadur Saxena And Ors. vs The State Of Bihar on 3 August, 1955Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/595572/13in which the above decisions, and some other decisions also such as. Rex v. Job Whitehead, (1928)21 Cr. App Rep 23 (T) and Abdul Gafur Kotwal v. Emperor, 1938 Cal 658 (AIR V 25) (U), wereconsidered; and Das J. with whom Pande J. agreed, held that the failure of the Judge, to give thejury the usual caution that in cases of this nature (in this case the accused had been convicted underSection 376, I. P. C.) it is unsafe to rely on the uncorroborated testimony of the prosecutrix, amountsto non-direction, and to treat the statements of the prosecutrix, herself to other witnesses ascorroborative evidence in such cases is a misdirection, which vitiates the charge to the jury. Mr.Samaiyar also relies on the decision of their Lordships of the Judicial Committee in Bhuboni Sahu v.The King, 1949 PC 257 (AIR V 36) (V) in which the law in India relating to accomplice evidence wasconsidered, and Sir John Beaumont, in delivering the judgment of the Board, said :The law in India relating to the evidence of, accomplices stands thus: Even before the passing of theIndian Evidence Act, 1872, it had been held by a Full Bench of the High Court of Calcutta in Queenv. Elahee Buksh, 5 Suth WR Cr 80 (W), that the law relating to accomplices evidence was the samein India as in England. Then came the Indian Evidence Act, which by Section 133 enacts that 'Anaccomplice shall be a competent witness against an accused person; and a conviction is not illegalmerely because it proceeds upon the uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice'.Illustration (B) to Section 114, Evidence Act, however, provides that "The Court may presume thatan accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he is corroborated in material particulars". Readingthese two enactments together, the Courts In India have held that whilst it is not illegal to act uponthe uncorroborated evidence of an accomplice it is a rule of prudence so universally followed as toamount almost to a rule of law that it is unsafe to act upon the evidence of an accomplice unless it iscorroborated in material respects so as to implicate the accused; and further, that the evidence ofone accomplice cannot be used to corroborate the evidence of another accomplice.The law in India, therefore, is substantially the same on the subject as the law in England, thoughthe rule of prudence may be said to be based upon the interpretation placed by the Courts on thephrase corroborated in material particulars in Illus. B to Section 114".In my opinion the law regarding accomplice evidence, and the nature and extent of corroborationwhich is necessary in such a case has now been firmly established by their Lordships of the SupremeCourt in Rameshwar v. The State of Rajasthan, 1952 SC 54 (AIR V 39) (X). In this case theconviction was based on the evidence of fee-victim and her mother alone.After considering all the decisions on the point-- English and Indian -- Bose J-, with whom Fazl Ali J. agreed, observed that though a woman, whohas been raped, is not an accomplice, but in all these cases a large volume of case law has grown upwhich treats the evidence of the complainant somewhat along the same lines as accomplice evidencethough often for widely differing reasons & the position now reached is that the rule aboutcorroboration has hardened into one of law. His Lordship then observed that "it is important tounderstand exactly what the rule is, and what the expression 'hardened into a rule of law' means".His Lordship then said :Shamsher Bahadur Saxena And Ors. vs The State Of Bihar on 3 August, 1955Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/595572/14"In my judgment, this branch of the law is the same as in England, and I am of opinion that the lucidexposition of it given by Lord Reading, the Lord Chief Justice of England, in The King v. Baskerville(O) (referred to above) cannot be bettered".22. The law regarding accomplice evidence, and the nature and extent of corroboration necessary,therefore, can be re-stated thus:23. The Evidence Act nowhere requires that in class of cases, commonly referred to as sexual, cases,there should be corroboration of the testimony of an accomplice. Although it says in Section 114 (b)that the Court may presume that an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he is corroborated inmaterial particulars, it makes it clear in Section 133 that an accomplice shall be a competent witnessagainst the accused person; and a conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon theuncorroborated testimony of an accomplice. There is no doubt, therefore, that the uncorroboratedevidence of an accomplice is admissible in evidence.But it has long been a rule of practice at Common Law, which has become virtually equivalent to arule of law, and which is exactly the law in India, so far as accomplices are concerned, and it iscertainly not any higher in the case of sexual offences, that the Judge should warn the jury of thedanger of convicting a prisoner on the uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice or accomplices,and it lies in the discretion of the Judge, to advise them not to convict upon such evidence; but theJudge should point out to the jury that it is within their legal province to convict upon suchunconfirmed evidence. If after this proper caution by the Judge, the jury nevertheless convict theprisoner, his conviction "will not be quashed, merely upon the ground that the accomplice'stestimony was uncorroborated. The only clarification necessary in India is where this class ofoffence is sometimes tried by a Judge without the aid of a jury. The true rule in every case of thistype is that the rule about the advisability of corroboration should be present to the mind of theJudge. In such cases it is necessary that the Judge should give some indication in his judgment thathe had this rule of caution in mind, and should proceed to give reasons for considering itunnecessary to require corroboration on the facts of the particular case before him and show why heconsiders it safe to convict without corroboration in that particular case. It is wrong for a Judge tothink that he could not, as a matter of law, convict without corroboration.The rule, which according to the cases has hardened into one of law, is not that corroboration isessential before there can be a conviction but that the necessity of corroboration, as a matter ofprudence, except where the circumstances make it safe to dispense with it, must be present to themind of the Judge, and in jury cases, must find place in the charge, before a conviction withoutcorroboration can be sustained.24. The nature and the extent of the corroboration that is required when it is not considered safe todispense with it, must necessarily vary with the circumstances of each case, and also according tothe particular circumstances of the offence charged.It is however clear (i) that it is not necessary that there should be independent confirmation of everymaterial circumstance in the sense that the independent evidence in the case, apart from theShamsher Bahadur Saxena And Ors. vs The State Of Bihar on 3 August, 1955Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/595572/15testimony of the complainant or accomplice, should itself be sufficient to sustain conviction; all thatis required is that there must be "some additional evidence rendering it probable that the story ofthe accomplice (or the complainant) is true and that it is reasonably safe to act upon it", (ii) Theindependent evidence must not only make it safe to believe that the crime was committed, taut mustin some way reasonably connect the accused with it; (iii) the corroboration must come fromindependent sources and thus ordinarily the testimony of one accomplice would not be sufficient tocorroborate that of another accomplice; (iv) the corroboration need not be direct evidence that theaccused committed the crime; it is sufficient if it is merely circumstantial evidence of his connectionwith the crime.25. 'Independent' merely means independent of sources which are likely to be tainted.26. Applying the above rule of law to the present case, we find that in this case there is no questionof the convictions having been based on uncorroborated testimony of the girls. The evidence of thesegirls, namely, P. Ws. 1, 11, 14, 21, 29 and 39, has been corroborated in all material particulars byindependent evidence of unimpeachable character, namely, Uchant Bahi, Ex. 26, which, as I havestated before, was maintained by the Ashram itself and which was recovered from the possession ofthe Ashram.I have already given reasons why I consider this Uchant Bahi, Ex. 26, as genuine and most reliable.The other documents, such &s Proceeding Book, 'letters and the like, which have been mentionedbefore, also corroborate fully the evidence of these girls. Independent witnesses, as alreadydiscussed, have also been examined whose evidence amply and fully corroborate the evidence ofthese girls.There is ample and definite indication in the judgment of the learned Assistant Sessions Judge thathe had this rule of caution regarding the necessity of corroboration in mind, because he considered'Sachinder Rai v. Emperor', (P) referred to above, relied upon on behalf of the accused. He hasdiscussed the evidence of each of these girls, namely, P. Ws. 1, 11, 14, 21, 29 and. 39, and shewn howthe version of abduction or kidnapping of each of these is corroborated by circumstantial evidence,oral testimonies of independent witnesses and documents, some of which have been mentionedabove, which were recovered from the Bhartiya Anath Ashram itself, particularly by Ex. 26, whereinthese girls are mentioned in the khata of their agents, except in the case of Dukhni who is mentionedin Ex. 26 in the khata of Reshmi, I, therefore,' reject the contention of the appellants that theevidence of P. Ws. 1, 11, 14, 21, 29 and 39 should be rejected as it is uncorroborated or notcorroborated by independent evidence.27. The third ground of attack is that the evidence of these girls is inadmissible, because they speakof previous acts of several accused, which are unconnected with the present indictment. I thinkthere is no substance in this contention. The case of 'R v. George Joseph Smith', (1915) 11 Cr. App.Pep 229 (Y), relied upon by Mr. Samaiyar, does not, in my opinion, support him. Section 15,Evidence Act runs thus :Shamsher Bahadur Saxena And Ors. vs The State Of Bihar on 3 August, 1955Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/595572/16"When there is a question whether an act was accidental or intentional, or done with a particularknowledge or intention, the fact that such act formed part of a series of 'similar occurrences, in eachof which the person doing the act was concerned, is relevant".Illustration (a) to Section 15, Evidence Act, is in point, and it covers the present case, inasmuch aswhat these prosecution witnesses have stated is that such act or acts, as deposed to by them, formedpart of a series of similar occurrences, in each of which, some of the accused doing the act wasconcerned. In the case of 'George Joseph Smith (Y)', the Lord Chief Justice, while consideringwhether the evidence 'was admissible or not in that case, observed as follows :"Whether the evidence was admissible or not depends on principles of law which have beenconsidered by this Court many times, and which depend in the main on the statement of the law byLord Herschell in 'Makin v. Attorney-General for New South Wales', (1893) 14 N. S. W. Rep. 1 (Z).The Lord Chancellor there points out: "It is undoubtedly not competent for the prosecution toadduce evidence tending to show that the accused has been guilty of criminal acts other than thosecovered by the indictment, for the purpose of leading to the conclusion that the accused is a personlikely, from his criminal conduct or character, to have committed the offence for which he is beingtried.On the other hand, the mere fact that the evidence adduced tends to shew the commission of othercrimes does not render it inadmissible if it be relevant to an issue before the jury, and it may be sorelevant if it bears upon the question whether the acts alleged to constitute the crime charged in theindictment were designed or accidental, or to rebut a defence which would otherwise be open to theaccused".It is, therefore, a general rule of law that when there is 'prima facie' evidence that an accused isguilty of the act charged, evidence of 'similar acts' is admissible to show that those acts were donewith intent. The evidence of previous acts of several accused, when such acts formed part of a seriesof 'similar occurrences', in each of which the person doing the act was concerned, is admissibleunder Section 15 of the Evidence Act. In my opinion, therefore, the evidence of these prosecutionwitnesses is admissible in evidence.28. The fourth contention of Mr. Samaiyar is that the charges under Sections 366 and 368, PenalCode, must fail, because some of these girls as well as D. Ws. 2, 3 and 4 have stated that the girls ofthe Ashram were free to go about in the Ashram and they used to go outside the house to bringwater from the tap and as such it is argued that on the evidence of these girls alone it is absolutelyclear that they were not kept confined at all.I am afraid I cannot accept this contention, because confinement does not consist in keeping anyperson shut up in a room, or confined in a particular place, but if any person is kept in a buildingunder the strict supervision of the person in charge of the place, and out of fear he does not runaway from that place, it cannot be said that that person was not kept confined in that place. None ofthe D. Ws. except the Dhobi witness, has named any of the girls, whom they had seen coming out,either to take water or for some other purpose and as such the evidence of the D. Ws. is valueless.Shamsher Bahadur Saxena And Ors. vs The State Of Bihar on 3 August, 1955Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/595572/17In the present case there is evidence of the girls themselves that they used to be kept confined andused to be assaulted whenever they wanted to do anything against the wishes of the accused, whowere in charge of the Ashram, and as such on the evidence of the girls and other evidence in the caseI am satisfied that wrongful confinement of these abducted girls has been proved.I agree with the learned Assistant Sessions Judge that "the oral and the circumstantial evidence,coupled with the documents which have been recovered" from the Bhartiya Anath Ashram, areconclusive to prove that the persons who were in charge of the Ashram, or who were working in theAshram as servants, managers, etc., had full knowledge of the fact that P. Ws. 1, 11, 14, 21 and 39were abducted and P. W. 29 was kidnapped and they had kept them confined and concealed in theAshram with this knowledge". In my opinion, therefore, the convictions under Sections 336 and368, Penal Code, have been proved and must be maintained.29. The last contention of Mr. Samaiyar is that these appellants have been falsely implicated at theinstance of Kuber Singh with whom Shamsher was on inimical terms, as admitted by some of theprosecution witnesses, and, therefore, they should be let off. In this connection the evidence of P. W.11 has been relied upon. P. W. 11 stated before the Committing Magistrate in the cross-examinationthat there was quarrel between Shamsher ana Kuber on account of the Ashram.It is submitted that Kuber was running an Ashram and Shamsher was also running an Ashram, and,therefore, there was a feeling of competition between the two and on account of Shamsher alsorunning a separate Ashram Kuber entertained feelings of enmity against Shamsher, and thatbecause these girls, namely, P. Ws. 1, 11, 14, 21, 29 and" 39, who were recovered from the Ashram ofShamsher and Lallu, were kept thereafter in the Ashram of Kuber, and they came from his Ashramto depose in Court, their statements in Court were not voluntary statements but tutored statementsat the instance of Kuber and as such whatever they have said in Court should be rejected.I am afraid I cannot accept this contention. These girls were recovered on 3-10-1951, by P. W. 81, M.N. Jha, the officer-in-charge and after their statements had been recorded by P. W. 81, they weretaken from Lallu's Ashram to Kuber's Ashram and kept there. Whatever statements these girls andwomen have made in Court are quite consistent with their statements, which were recorded by P. W.81 at the time of their recovery, and as such it cannot be said that these prosecution witnesses weremaking any statement contrary to their previous statements at the instance of Kuber Singh, I,therefore, reject this contention also.30. I, therefore, uphold the convictions of the appellants under Sections 120B, 366 and 368, PenalCode, and also maintain their sentences, which I do not consider, in the circumstances of this case,to be at all severe.31. In the result, the appeal is dismissed, the convictions and sentences are upheld, and theappellants must now surrender to their bail bonds to serve out the remainder of their sentences.Banerji, J.Shamsher Bahadur Saxena And Ors. vs The State Of Bihar on 3 August, 1955Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/595572/1832.I agree.Shamsher Bahadur Saxena And Ors. vs The State Of Bihar on 3 August, 1955Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/595572/19