Service Law – Claim of Arrears of Pension and Retirement Benefits – Delay and Laches – Revision of Pay and Allowance (ROPA) Rules, 1998 – All pensionary claims and retirement benefits are not hit by delay and laches. The principal reason being that such delay and laches do not affect any third party rights. The claims of interest on the delayed payment of benefits under ROPA 1998 must also be viewed in similar lines. The same is a benefit of service. The delay in claiming the interest on the delayed payment of ROPA 2000 is not likely to prejudice any third party. The respondent authorities cannot be deemed to have altered any position. There can be no estoppel against the petitioners’ claim.Mr. Tapan Datta Gupta, Mr. Bikash Roy, Mr. Parvej Anam … For the petitioners; Ms. Sipra Majumder, Mr. Subrabhat Bhattacharya … For the respondent no.1/StateAffidavit of service filed in Court today is taken on record.The petitioners are 44 in number. The petitioners are retired employees of Calcutta Tramway Company (1978) Ltd. now known as West Bengal Transport Corporation Limited (in short “WBTC”). The Court fees paid is found to be sufficient. The petitioners claim interest on delayed payment of benefits under the Revision of Pay and Allowance Rules, 1998 (in short “ROPA 1998”) which is applicable to them. In terms of a circular issued by the Deputy Secretary, Transport Department, Government of West Bengal, dated 23rd June, 2000, the Employer made the following commitment:Admittedly, the payments were delayed and finally made only on diverse dates between 2009 and 2014. The petitioners claim interest on the said arrears from the year 2000 till the year 2021 by filing this petition on or about 4th August, 2021.Reference is made by counsel for the petitioners to decisions of coordinate Benches of this Court in the case of Calcutta Tram Mazdoor Sabha v. State of West Bengal in WP No.910 of 2006, being order dated 16th April, 2008; Subhra Kumar Dey & Ors. v. State of West Bengal in WP No.1844 of 2008, order dated 17th February, 2009; order dated 2nd June, 2004 in WP No.514 of 2012, Debendra Nath Ghosh & Ors. v. State of West Bengal & Ors. and a very recent order of 20th April, 2021 passed in WPO 175 of 2021. Claims similar to the petitioners but upto the year 2008 have been allowed in these cases. The respondents did not challenge the orders. In a contempt proceeding, being CPAN 177 of 2020, arising out of WPA 20866 of 2019 by an order dated 24th November, 2021, the amount of interest paid till the year 2008 by the respondents to the petitioners therein was also duly recorded.On behalf of the petitioners, two judgments have been relied upon to demonstrate that delay in making an application for retiral benefits is not fatal. These judgments are (2008) 8 SCC 648 [Union of India & Ors. v. Tarsem Singh] and (2016) 13 SCC 797 [Asger Ibrahim Amin v. Life Insurance Corporation of India].In Union of India & Ors. v. Tarsem Singh reported in (2008) 8 SCC 648 at paragraph 7, it was stated as follows:-The said decision has been followed in the case of Asger Ibrahim Amin v. Life Insurance Corporation of India reported in (2016) 13 SCC 797. The relevant paragraphs are set out hereinbelow:-We respectfully concur with these observations which if extrapolated or applied to the factual matrix of the present case would have the effect of restricting the claim for pension, if otherwise sustainable in law, to three years previous to when it was raised in a judicial forum. Such claims recur month to month and would not stand extinguished on the application of the laws of prescription, merely because the legal remedy pertaining to the time-barred part of it has become unavailable. This is too well entrenched in our jurisprudence, foreclosing any fresh consideration.The petitioners have also relied upon the judgment in S.K. Dua v. State of Haryana & Anr. reported in (2008) 3 SCC 44 wherein the Hon’ble Supreme Court has held that an employee had a right under Articles 14,19 and 21 of the Constitution of India to claim interest on delayed payment of retirement benefits. Relevant paragraph is quoted below:-Counsel for the petitioners relied upon a communication dated 23rd June, 2000 issued by the Deputy Secretary, Government of West Bengal, to the Chairman of the Calcutta Tramways Company. He refers to paragraph 7 which prescribes that period of arrear is from 1st April, 1997 to 31st March, 2000.It is further stipulated that the installments should be paid along with the interest to be calculated from 1st April, 2000 as admissible in respect of accumulation in General Provident Fund account. He, therefore, submits that the interest on the arrears must be calculated and paid for the entire period from the year 2000 till the year 2021.The learned advocate appearing for the State submits that since the petitioners have admitted in their writ petition that sums of claim towards interest are not retiral dues, hence the decisions in Tarsem Singh (supra) and Asger Ibrahim (supra) relied upon by the petitioners have no manner of application. In fact, the claim has to be rejected in view of Asger Ibrahim (supra). It is also submitted that interest on arrear salary paid on diverse dates between 2009 and 2014 could not have been claimed beyond three years and hence the claim of the petitioners is hopelessly barred by limitation and stale.It follows from the above that all pensionary claims and retirement benefits are not hit by delay and laches. The principal reason being that such delay and laches do not affect any third party rights.The claims of interest on the delayed payment of benefits under ROPA 1998 must also be viewed in similar lines. The same is a benefit of service. The delay in claiming the interest on the delayed payment of ROPA 2000 is not likely to prejudice any third party. The respondent authorities cannot be deemed to have altered any position. There can be no estoppel against the petitioners’ claim.Upon considering Tarsem Singh (supra) and Asger Ibrahim (supra), I also do not find the petitioners are disentitled to make the claim for interest in delayed payment even though they have approached this Court in 2021 since it is a continuing cause as held in Asger Ibrahim (supra).Counsel for the respondents relies upon a decision rendered by this Court in the case of Prabir Kumar Mitra v. State of West Bengal & Ors., being WPA 0026581 of 2013, being order dated 13th January, 2020. It is submitted that similar claim for interest which was delayed has been rejected by this Court. This Court notices that in the said Prabir Kumar Mitra (Supra) decision, the writ petitioner therein had approached this Court on two earlier occasions and yet chose not to raise any claim on the issue of interest. It is in that context that the said claim was rejected. Since the facts of the said case are substantially different from the instant case, the said decision cannot come to the aid of the respondents.This Court is unable to accept the said submission as the Government memorandum speaks of payment of arrears along with interest, the respondents are bound to act in accordance with the said memorandum. The petitioners would, therefore, be entitled to interest for delayed payment on the installment on the arrears for the period from the date it fell due to the date when each of the individual petitioners received payment although the petitioners have approached this Court only in the year 2021.I have no reason to differ with the view taken by the Co-ordinate benches in the matters referred to above.However, while awarding interest on delayed payment of service benefits, due regard must be had to financial condition of the employer. Reference is also made to the case of State of Andhra Pradesh and Another v. Dinavahi Lakshmi Kameswari reported in 2021 SCC OnLine SC 237. The relevant paragraphs of the said decision are set out hereinbelow:-For the reasons stated hereinabove, the writ petition is allowed. The respondents shall pay interest from the date of accrual of the amounts claimed in respect of each of the petitioners till actual payment of such arrears, less any interest already paid, at the rate of 7% per annum to each of the petitioners within a period of two months from the date of communication of a server copy of this order without insisting on production of a certified copy.In default of payment of the aforesaid interest within a period of two months, the rate of interest shall increase to 8 per cent. Although an employee of a Government company/State corporations/statutory corporations are different from Government employees and the liability of Central/State Government is limited as per the policy yet in view of the commitment from the State Government in the communication dated 23rd June, 2000 the State Government shall ensure appropriate funds to the WBTC to comply with the aforesaid order.With the aforesaid observations, the writ petition is disposed of.There shall be no order as to costs.Urgent photostat certified copy of this order, if applied for, be given to the parties, upon compliance of necessary formalities.