Constitution of India – Article 21 – Customary rights to carry out an activity for livelihood – Once a customary right to carry out an occupation for a means of livelihood is affected, the principles enshrined in Article 21 will be invoked. This forms the basis of the State’s duty to compensate in such cases – Such a state-wide compensation policy is required for the compensation of any community whose customary rights to carry out an activity for their livelihood is impacted by government infrastructure projects.IssueFACTORS AND CRITERIA FOR FORMULATING A COMPREHENSIVE COMPENSATION POLICY A. PUBLIC PROJECTS FOR WHICH COMPENSATION SHOULD BE PAIDi. The State Government or the implementing agency (by itself or through a committee that is set out below) should at the first instance identify whether a project may have an impact on persons in the vicinity of the project (“Project Affected Persons”). The State Government or the committee only needs to be satisfied that there is some chance of a project impacting the Project Affected Persons at this stage.Once it so determines, the committee should proceed to identify whether the customary rights of Project Affected Persons are being impacted.ii. In determining whether the Project Affected Persons have a customary right (either to practice fishing in waters under the dominion and control of the State Government, or to carry out any activity on land in relation to earning a means of livelihood), the existence of such a customary right may be determined on the basis of the following criteria:(a) whether the usage has been for a substantial period of time;(b) whether the usage is regular and continuous;(c) whether the usage is certain and not varied; and (d) whether the usage is reasonable.iii. If an application of the specific facts of that Public Project to the above criteria leads the State Government/implementing agency to the conclusion that customary rights to practice a livelihood are being impacted, the State Government or the agency implementing the Public Project should make provisions in the cost of the Public Project to compensate the Project Affected Persons. The compensation should then be paid out to the Project Affected Persons at the appropriate time.B. APPOINTMENT OF COMPENSATION COMMITTEEiv. Once the above determination has been made, there will be many details that need to be looked into, such as – the exact number of families in a community that need to be compensated; the type of vocation being practiced by the family/person; the type of loss being suffered; the manner of calculating quantum of compensation; the amount of compensation to be paid to each family/person; and various other such questions. For this purpose, a committee (“Compensation Committee“) may be constituted comprising of:v. The Compensation Committee may be required to address all the questions that may arise in the compensation of Project Affected Persons. This may include, but is not restricted to:C. GUIDELINES FOR THE COMPENSATION COMMITTEEvi. The following paragraphs contain suggestions regarding the manner in which the Compensation Committee can determine the types of loss suffered, formula for determining the quantum of compensation etc. In making these suggestions, we have taken guidance from the approach used in determining compensation payable in the case of the Mumbai Trans Harbour Link (“MTHL”) and the NGT’s approach in the JNPT port project (“JNPT Project”).vii. For the Public Projects where the State Government or the implementing agency recognizes and acknowledges a customary right, the Compensation Committee will find it helpful to make the following determinations:Direct Losses:viii. Direct losses may include those losses which may impact or restrict the access to parts of land or water over which the Affected Persons exercise customary rights to earn a livelihood.Indirect Losses:ix. Indirect losses would be those that impact the customary rights of Affected Persons by impacting the productivity or yield generated from land or water, even if the Affected Persons continue to have physical access thereto. x. Indirect losses include, but are not restricted to, losses of the following nature:a. Potential ecological damage caused by the Public Project, which would detrimentally affect the customary rights of Affected Persons b. Loss of biodiversity caused by the Public Project, which would detrimentally affect the customary rights of Affected Persons c. Change of tidal flows or any other aspects affecting the yield from that land or water (fish catch, quality of timber in the forest etc.), which would detrimentally affect the customary rights of Affected Persons d. Discharge of effluents, pollutants or debris which may detrimentally affect customary rights of Affected Persons e. Potential of the Public Project to cause an influx human population, or  increase in footfall which might affect the Affected Persons’ practice of their customary rights. For e.g. by loss of pasturage, forest lands, etc. Permanent Loss:xi. The direct or indirect loss being caused by a project may be of a permanent or a temporary nature.xii. Every loss which is not of a temporary nature would be of a permanent nature and would be required to be compensated accordingly. Temporary Loss:xiii. Temporary losses might include the temporary loss of access to a portion of land or water over which such customary rights are being exercised. For example, during the construction phase of the Public Project. xiv. Temporary losses may also include any loss caused due to ecological degradation, pollution, etc. which is of a reversible nature. xv. Change of tidal flows and turbidity of the water during the construction phase of a Public Project may be a temporary or permanent loss depending on whether the adverse conditions are reversible or not.Quantum of Compensationxvi. One way of calculating the quantum of compensation would be by assigning a monetary value to each type of loss described above, determining what type of loss a family/person has suffered, and then compensating the family/person on the basis of the figure arrived at.xvii. The manner in which this exercise was done in the MTHL Compensation Policy could be adopted or be of guidance by the Compensation Committee for a Public Project. The MTHL Compensation Policy is discussed in detail later in these recommendations.xviii. Another approach is the one adopted by the NGT in the Ramdas Janardhan Koli v MoEF & Ors. (supra)a. The NGT determined that each affected family should be compensated for loss of earnings for a period of three years.b. For this purpose, it was assumed that each family, on average, would comprise of 4 members – two men and two women.c. The average total earnings per family was taken to be Rs. 800/day. This was multiplied by 365 to arrive at an annual compensation figure of Rs. 2,92,000/- per year.d. Due to “mere subsistence”, 1/3rd of this amount reduced, and the final figure per family arrived at = Rs. 1,94,666/- per year.e. Multiplying this by 1630 families for 3 years (1,94,666 x 1630 x 3) the project proponent therein was to pay a total compensation of Rs. 95,19,20,000/-.xix. An alternative approach to compensation may be the more scientific approach adopted in the MTHL Compensation Policy.D. EXAMPLE OF MTHL COMPENSATION POLICYBroad classification of fishermen into 3 categories xx. The MTHL Compensation Policy considered compensation payable to fishermen affected by the MTHL.xxi. A Fisherfolk Compensation Committee (FCC) was set up to monitor and take necessary actions for implementation of the MHTL Compensation Policy. xxii. The policy, at paragraph 2.1, classified fishermen broadly into three categories:a. Commercial: These are fishermen that reside in the Koliwadas but do not fish in the creek. Instead, they use large trawlers to fish in the deep sea;b. Artisanal fisher-folk: Tradition fishermen that have fished in the area for generations, but who supplement their fishing income by employing some family members in industries;c. Subsistence fisher-folk: Daily fish catchers who generally fish by hand- picking. This is an unorganized group and should therefore be given special attention. xxiii. This classification, as we will see, becomes relevant at the time of determining quantum of compensation payable.Types of Lossxxiv. Using some of the classifications of types of loss discussed above, the MTHL Compensation Policy, classified losses in terms of the following types of loss. This classification, together with the three types of fishermen, were used to calculate the amount payable as compensation. (Such an exercise can be done even for losses caused to other types of vocations, even though this example is with respect to fishermen).xxv. The types of loss, as observed in paragraph 1.7, were:Quantification of Compensation:xxvi. Each of the types of loss (C1 to C6) were assigned a monetary value. For e.g., those fishermen who suffered a loss in the nature of C1, were entitled to a one-time compensation of Rs. 5,84,000/- per unit. Loss in the nature of C2 was assessed to be 50% of the amount provided per unit for C1. And so on. A unit is a single or Dol Net.xxvii. Ascertaining the type of loss that was suffered by a family depended on the category of fishermen that they were classified under, i.e., commercial, artisanal, or subsistence.xxviii. The number of disbursements made per year also depended on the type of loss. For e.g., C1 loss required one payment per year. C4 required quarterly disbursement.xxix. The final compensation matrix for the MTHL Compensation Policy was as below:E. CONCLUSION ON SUGGESTED POLICYxxx. The policy framework above are only suggestions. The illustrations are to elucidate the policy considerations for policy makers to frame a rational and fair policy.The discussion of the MTHL Compensation Policy has been done to illustrate how the policy framework can – and has – been implemented in an infrastructure project. It is in the same manner that it should be adopted for other projects going forward. In addition to the suggested policy framework, a grievance redressal mechanism may be considered by the appropriate authorities while framing a compensation policy. Although, for the present the State has not indicated that it will undertake such an exercise for framing a state-wide policy, by this Order we hereby direct Respondent No. 1 to frame such a policy. The suggestions as to the content and approach are obviously in no way binding. The purpose of including them in this Order was only to expedite and facilitate such an exercise.FINDINGS ON ISSUE (iv)Respondent No. 1, in its second Affidavit in Reply, has recommended the constitution of a committee (“TCB Compensation Committee”) to determine the type of loss that each of the Project Affected Fishermen will encounter as a result of construction of TCB III, as well as the amount of compensation due to each Project Affected Fisherman. For this purpose, Respondent No. 8 has recommended which members should be made to be a part of the TCB Compensation Committee. Even the Petitioner has made a similar recommendation for a committee, along with the members who the Petitioner believes should be a part of the TCB Compensation Committee. In terms of the submissions made by the various parties and the Amicus Curiae, we direct that the TCB Compensation Committee should be comprised of:The parties agreed that the representative of the MSRDC should not be made the Chairman of the TCB Compensation Committee, so as to avoid any perception of conflict of interest. Even pending the state-wide policy, the TCB Compensation Committee should determine compensation payable to Project Affected Persons, keeping in mind the principles enunciated in this Court’s finding on Issue (iii).CONCLUSIONIn keeping with the findings, listed the above Writ Petition after six weeks for reporting compliance on i) framing state-wide policy; ii) determination of compensation by the TCB Compensation Committee to Project Affected Persons represented by the Petitioner. The Court made appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered by the Learned Senior Counsel Shri Sharan Jagtiani (appointed as Amicus Curiae by this Court) and his legal team, more particularly, Shri Aditya Pimple, Shri Rohil Bandekar and Shri Siddharth Joshi.JUDGMENT: (Per S.J. Kathawalla & Milind Jadhav, JJ.) : Mariyayi Macchimaar Sahkari Sanstha Maryadit v. Department of Fisheries, Maharashtra, [Bombay High Court, 12 August, 2021]Constitution of India – Article 21 – Customary rights to carry out an activity for livelihood – Once a customary right to carry out an occupation for a means of livelihood is affected, the principles enshrined in Article 21 will be invoked. This forms the basis of the State’s duty to compensate in such cases – Such a state-wide compensation policy is required for the compensation of any community whose customary rights to carry out an activity for their livelihood is impacted by government infrastructure projects.IssueFACTORS AND CRITERIA FOR FORMULATING A COMPREHENSIVE COMPENSATION POLICY A. PUBLIC PROJECTS FOR WHICH COMPENSATION SHOULD BE PAIDi. The State Government or the implementing agency (by itself or through a committee that is set out below) should at the first instance identify whether a project may have an impact on persons in the vicinity of the project (“Project Affected Persons”). The State Government or the committee only needs to be satisfied that there is some chance of a project impacting the Project Affected Persons at this stage.Once it so determines, the committee should proceed to identify whether the customary rights of Project Affected Persons are being impacted.ii. In determining whether the Project Affected Persons have a customary right (either to practice fishing in waters under the dominion and control of the State Government, or to carry out any activity on land in relation to earning a means of livelihood), the existence of such a customary right may be determined on the basis of the following criteria:(a) whether the usage has been for a substantial period of time;(b) whether the usage is regular and continuous;(c) whether the usage is certain and not varied; and (d) whether the usage is reasonable.iii. If an application of the specific facts of that Public Project to the above criteria leads the State Government/implementing agency to the conclusion that customary rights to practice a livelihood are being impacted, the State Government or the agency implementing the Public Project should make provisions in the cost of the Public Project to compensate the Project Affected Persons. The compensation should then be paid out to the Project Affected Persons at the appropriate time.B. APPOINTMENT OF COMPENSATION COMMITTEEiv. Once the above determination has been made, there will be many details that need to be looked into, such as – the exact number of families in a community that need to be compensated; the type of vocation being practiced by the family/person; the type of loss being suffered; the manner of calculating quantum of compensation; the amount of compensation to be paid to each family/person; and various other such questions. For this purpose, a committee (“Compensation Committee“) may be constituted comprising of:v. The Compensation Committee may be required to address all the questions that may arise in the compensation of Project Affected Persons. This may include, but is not restricted to:C. GUIDELINES FOR THE COMPENSATION COMMITTEEvi. The following paragraphs contain suggestions regarding the manner in which the Compensation Committee can determine the types of loss suffered, formula for determining the quantum of compensation etc. In making these suggestions, we have taken guidance from the approach used in determining compensation payable in the case of the Mumbai Trans Harbour Link (“MTHL”) and the NGT’s approach in the JNPT port project (“JNPT Project”).vii. For the Public Projects where the State Government or the implementing agency recognizes and acknowledges a customary right, the Compensation Committee will find it helpful to make the following determinations:Direct Losses:viii. Direct losses may include those losses which may impact or restrict the access to parts of land or water over which the Affected Persons exercise customary rights to earn a livelihood.Indirect Losses:ix. Indirect losses would be those that impact the customary rights of Affected Persons by impacting the productivity or yield generated from land or water, even if the Affected Persons continue to have physical access thereto. x. Indirect losses include, but are not restricted to, losses of the following nature:a. Potential ecological damage caused by the Public Project, which would detrimentally affect the customary rights of Affected Persons b. Loss of biodiversity caused by the Public Project, which would detrimentally affect the customary rights of Affected Persons c. Change of tidal flows or any other aspects affecting the yield from that land or water (fish catch, quality of timber in the forest etc.), which would detrimentally affect the customary rights of Affected Persons d. Discharge of effluents, pollutants or debris which may detrimentally affect customary rights of Affected Persons e. Potential of the Public Project to cause an influx human population, or  increase in footfall which might affect the Affected Persons’ practice of their customary rights. For e.g. by loss of pasturage, forest lands, etc. Permanent Loss:xi. The direct or indirect loss being caused by a project may be of a permanent or a temporary nature.xii. Every loss which is not of a temporary nature would be of a permanent nature and would be required to be compensated accordingly. Temporary Loss:xiii. Temporary losses might include the temporary loss of access to a portion of land or water over which such customary rights are being exercised. For example, during the construction phase of the Public Project. xiv. Temporary losses may also include any loss caused due to ecological degradation, pollution, etc. which is of a reversible nature. xv. Change of tidal flows and turbidity of the water during the construction phase of a Public Project may be a temporary or permanent loss depending on whether the adverse conditions are reversible or not.Quantum of Compensationxvi. One way of calculating the quantum of compensation would be by assigning a monetary value to each type of loss described above, determining what type of loss a family/person has suffered, and then compensating the family/person on the basis of the figure arrived at.xvii. The manner in which this exercise was done in the MTHL Compensation Policy could be adopted or be of guidance by the Compensation Committee for a Public Project. The MTHL Compensation Policy is discussed in detail later in these recommendations.xviii. Another approach is the one adopted by the NGT in the Ramdas Janardhan Koli v MoEF & Ors. (supra)a. The NGT determined that each affected family should be compensated for loss of earnings for a period of three years.b. For this purpose, it was assumed that each family, on average, would comprise of 4 members – two men and two women.c. The average total earnings per family was taken to be Rs. 800/day. This was multiplied by 365 to arrive at an annual compensation figure of Rs. 2,92,000/- per year.d. Due to “mere subsistence”, 1/3rd of this amount reduced, and the final figure per family arrived at = Rs. 1,94,666/- per year.e. Multiplying this by 1630 families for 3 years (1,94,666 x 1630 x 3) the project proponent therein was to pay a total compensation of Rs. 95,19,20,000/-.xix. An alternative approach to compensation may be the more scientific approach adopted in the MTHL Compensation Policy.D. EXAMPLE OF MTHL COMPENSATION POLICYBroad classification of fishermen into 3 categories xx. The MTHL Compensation Policy considered compensation payable to fishermen affected by the MTHL.xxi. A Fisherfolk Compensation Committee (FCC) was set up to monitor and take necessary actions for implementation of the MHTL Compensation Policy. xxii. The policy, at paragraph 2.1, classified fishermen broadly into three categories:a. Commercial: These are fishermen that reside in the Koliwadas but do not fish in the creek. Instead, they use large trawlers to fish in the deep sea;b. Artisanal fisher-folk: Tradition fishermen that have fished in the area for generations, but who supplement their fishing income by employing some family members in industries;c. Subsistence fisher-folk: Daily fish catchers who generally fish by hand- picking. This is an unorganized group and should therefore be given special attention. xxiii. This classification, as we will see, becomes relevant at the time of determining quantum of compensation payable.Types of Lossxxiv. Using some of the classifications of types of loss discussed above, the MTHL Compensation Policy, classified losses in terms of the following types of loss. This classification, together with the three types of fishermen, were used to calculate the amount payable as compensation. (Such an exercise can be done even for losses caused to other types of vocations, even though this example is with respect to fishermen).xxv. The types of loss, as observed in paragraph 1.7, were:Quantification of Compensation:xxvi. Each of the types of loss (C1 to C6) were assigned a monetary value. For e.g., those fishermen who suffered a loss in the nature of C1, were entitled to a one-time compensation of Rs. 5,84,000/- per unit. Loss in the nature of C2 was assessed to be 50% of the amount provided per unit for C1. And so on. A unit is a single or Dol Net.xxvii. Ascertaining the type of loss that was suffered by a family depended on the category of fishermen that they were classified under, i.e., commercial, artisanal, or subsistence.xxviii. The number of disbursements made per year also depended on the type of loss. For e.g., C1 loss required one payment per year. C4 required quarterly disbursement.xxix. The final compensation matrix for the MTHL Compensation Policy was as below:E. CONCLUSION ON SUGGESTED POLICYxxx. The policy framework above are only suggestions. The illustrations are to elucidate the policy considerations for policy makers to frame a rational and fair policy.The discussion of the MTHL Compensation Policy has been done to illustrate how the policy framework can – and has – been implemented in an infrastructure project. It is in the same manner that it should be adopted for other projects going forward. In addition to the suggested policy framework, a grievance redressal mechanism may be considered by the appropriate authorities while framing a compensation policy. Although, for the present the State has not indicated that it will undertake such an exercise for framing a state-wide policy, by this Order we hereby direct Respondent No. 1 to frame such a policy. The suggestions as to the content and approach are obviously in no way binding. The purpose of including them in this Order was only to expedite and facilitate such an exercise.FINDINGS ON ISSUE (iv)Respondent No. 1, in its second Affidavit in Reply, has recommended the constitution of a committee (“TCB Compensation Committee”) to determine the type of loss that each of the Project Affected Fishermen will encounter as a result of construction of TCB III, as well as the amount of compensation due to each Project Affected Fisherman. For this purpose, Respondent No. 8 has recommended which members should be made to be a part of the TCB Compensation Committee. Even the Petitioner has made a similar recommendation for a committee, along with the members who the Petitioner believes should be a part of the TCB Compensation Committee. In terms of the submissions made by the various parties and the Amicus Curiae, we direct that the TCB Compensation Committee should be comprised of:The parties agreed that the representative of the MSRDC should not be made the Chairman of the TCB Compensation Committee, so as to avoid any perception of conflict of interest. Even pending the state-wide policy, the TCB Compensation Committee should determine compensation payable to Project Affected Persons, keeping in mind the principles enunciated in this Court’s finding on Issue (iii).CONCLUSIONIn keeping with the findings, listed the above Writ Petition after six weeks for reporting compliance on i) framing state-wide policy; ii) determination of compensation by the TCB Compensation Committee to Project Affected Persons represented by the Petitioner. The Court made appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered by the Learned Senior Counsel Shri Sharan Jagtiani (appointed as Amicus Curiae by this Court) and his legal team, more particularly, Shri Aditya Pimple, Shri Rohil Bandekar and Shri Siddharth Joshi.JUDGMENT: (Per S.J. Kathawalla & Milind Jadhav, JJ.) : Mariyayi Macchimaar Sahkari Sanstha Maryadit v. Department of Fisheries, Maharashtra, [Bombay High Court, 12 August, 2021]