Service Law – Suspension cannot be for an indefinite period – the purpose of the suspension is as follows: (a) to deliver a message to a that the irresponsible conduct etc., will not be allowed (b) to prevent the suspended employee from interfering with the progress of the inquiry, influencing the witnesses etc and to ensure that the inquiry is completed smoothly (c) orders of suspension cannot be mechanically passed and there must be application of mind.This writ petition is filed by the petitioner questioning the order of suspension dated 16.09.2020.This Court has heard Sri P.Durga Prasad and learned Government Pleader for Services-II appearing for the main answering respondents.Sri P.Durga Prasad, learned counsel points out that the petitioner was working as Panchayat Secretary in Lalacheruvu, Rajanagaram Mandal from September, 2015 till 17.07.2019. The impugned proceedings dated 16.09.2020 were issued suspending him from service on the ground that he had misappropriated house tax and private tap fee collection amounts to a tune of Rs.57.27 lakhs in Lalacheruvu when he was posted there. Initially, proceedings dated 07.09.2020 were issued in which the District Collector had signed the suspension order. The petitioner challenged the same in a writ petition. Learned counsel submits that realizing a legal mistake, the fresh impugned proceedings was issued by the Commissioner for Panchayat Raj. It is his contention that the alleged failure to collect the money and/or misappropriating the same took place long prior to his transfer on 17.07.2009. In view of the fact that the petitioner is no longer working in the same area namely Lalacheruvu, he argues that there is no need or necessity to keep him under suspension. Apart from that, it is submitted that there is no independent application of the mind before the order of suspension was passed and by relying on an order of District Collector dated 07.09.2020, the impugned proceedings were issued. Lastly, relying on paras 8 and 9 of the writ affidavit, the learned counsel raised the point that as the petitioner is not posted at the place whether the alleged misappropriation took place and is not the custodian of the records, the question of his tampering the records, tampering with the case etc., will not arise. Therefore, learned counsel argues that the order is incorrect and deserves to be set aside. Learned counsel also filed a memo along with five reported cases and argued on the basis of the five cases that the Court can interfere in case of suspension also.In reply to this, learned Government Pleader for Services argues that the Court has limited jurisdiction to interfere in cases of suspension pending enquiry. He pointed out that the amounts collected for house tax and private tap fee from the house owners of the Grampanchayat were not remitted to the account of Grampanchayat thereby causing the loss. It is pointed out that only after a detailed enquiry was conducted, the action was taken. It is also mentioned in the counter that there is dereliction of duty as the petitioner entrusted the job to subordinate staff, contract staff and had failed to remit the amounts by defining on daily basis.Learned Government Pleader also argued that there is no infringement of the fundamental right of the petitioner nor is there any infringement of rules of natural justice. He argues that after the Extension Officer conducted enquiry, a show cause was also issued to the petitioner. Lastly, he submits that as per Rule 34 of the CCA Rules, there is an effective alternative remedy of filing an appeal. Therefore, he submits in conclusion that as there is no arbitrary exercise of power and as there is an effective alternative remedy, this Court should not interfere at the stage of the show cause notice.This Court after considering the submissions, the evidence on record and the pleadings notices that the law on the subject is not in doubt. Suspension per se is not a punishment. The power to suspend a Government servant in a State service is available under Rule 8 of the CCA Rules. This is not in dispute. However, it is also clear that as per the settled law, the suspension cannot be for an indefinite period. The State Government itself has issued G.Os directing the review of suspension to every six months. Apart from that, the law is also settled that the purpose of the suspension is as follows:(a) to deliver a message to a that the irresponsible conduct etc., will not be allowed(b) to prevent the suspended employee from interfering with the progress of the inquiry, influencing the witnesses etc and to ensure that the inquiry is completed smoothly(c) orders of suspension cannot be mechanically passed and there must be application of mind.If the records of this case are examined, it is clear that although the suspension was issued on 16.09.2020, till date, the departmental proceedings are not initiated. One year has passed. The petitioner has also come before this Court with a specific ground as mentioned in the writ affidavit that the alleged misappropriation and failure to supervise took place in Lalacheruvu Grampanchayat. Admittedly, the petitioner has left this post on transfer in July, 2019 itself. In paras 7 and 8 of his writ affidavit, the petitioner has specifically stated that he is not the custodian of the records, nor is he at the same place where the alleged misappropriation took place. He also states clearly that there cannot be any tampering of records or evidence, since he is working elsewhere. In the counter affidavit that is filed, these issues are not at all answered. Normally, suspension pending enquiry is justified on such grounds of likelihood of the witness tampering the evidence, influencing the witnesses etc. In the case on hand, the available record does not disclose that such an opinion has been formed by the respondents or is very likely to happen. The petitioner admittedly is not working in the same place and the suspension order is issued long after he is transferred.The counter affidavit filed shows that the Extension Officer has conducted an enquiry from February, 2020 itself. Ultimately, it appears that in July, 2020, he had submitted a report. Portions of that report are reproduced in the counter affidavit. The show cause given to the petitioner has also resulted in an explanation. At this stage itself, the amounts said to have been expended by the petitioner are also deducted before the final demand is made. Therefore, it is clear that the respondents are in possession of a certain amount of data to base their case. Therefore it is also not a case of suspension in order to complete the investigation or to facilitate the ascertainment of facts etc. In the reply affidavit, the petitioner has also brought certain additional facts to the notice of this Court. He also filed certain documents. Re-enquiry has been ordered by the Commissioner of Panchayat Raj into the alleged misappropriation. This is borne out by the proceedings dated 09.03.2020. On 10.03.2020, for this new preliminary re- enquiry, the petitioner was invited to attend. The petitioner also submitted a written reply or a note to this preliminary enquiry. As mentioned in the reply affidavit, the District Collector has yet not come to a firm conclusion in this re- enquiry and the District Panchayat Officer has also not submitted a report. This is a subsequent event that is brought to the courts notice.In the case of Ajay Kumar Choudary v. Union of India, 2015 (7) SCC 291 the Hon’ble Supreme Court noted that an extended suspension can cause trauma. There is a Division Bench judgment of this Court in WP.No.8185 of 2020, but to the knowledge of this Court, the same is now under challenge before the Hon’ble Supreme Court. The same is not being looked into for now. In State of Tamilnadu v. Pramod Kumar IPS, Civil Appeal No.8427-8428 of 2018 the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India relying upon Ajay Kumar Choudary’s case (1 supra) has held that on the basis of the available material, keeping the petitioner under protracted suspension is not called for. The Supreme Court also held that he should be reinstated into service.In conclusion, this Court is of the opinion that the order of suspension cannot be sustained now because:(1) there is no whisper nowhere in the entire set of documents filed or in the counter affidavits filed that the petitioner can still influence a witness or tamper with the record.(2) It is not the case of the respondents that further material has to be gathered, witnesses are being examined or that the records are being traced etc.(3) The reason for suspending the petitioner almost a year after his transfer from the post is not explained and there is no visible “application of mind” which is needed and a mechanical suspension order cannot be countenanced in law.(4) more that a year has elapsed without a review being conducted also and lastly,(5) prolonged suspension itself can amount to a punishment in a way.In the facts and circumstances of this case, this Court is of the opinion that the petitioner has to succeed. Therefore, there shall be an order as prayed for and the impugned order dated 16.09.2020 is set aside. It is hoped that the enquiry, if any, would be completed in a time bound and strict manner. The petitioner is also cautioned not to in any way interfere with the progress of the enquiry/interfere with the witnesses etc when the same is commenced against him.With these observations, the writ petition is allowed. No order as to costs. As a sequel, the miscellaneous petitions if any shall stand dismissed.Service Law – Suspension cannot be for an indefinite period – the purpose of the suspension is as follows: (a) to deliver a message to a that the irresponsible conduct etc., will not be allowed (b) to prevent the suspended employee from interfering with the progress of the inquiry, influencing the witnesses etc and to ensure that the inquiry is completed smoothly (c) orders of suspension cannot be mechanically passed and there must be application of mind.This writ petition is filed by the petitioner questioning the order of suspension dated 16.09.2020.This Court has heard Sri P.Durga Prasad and learned Government Pleader for Services-II appearing for the main answering respondents.Sri P.Durga Prasad, learned counsel points out that the petitioner was working as Panchayat Secretary in Lalacheruvu, Rajanagaram Mandal from September, 2015 till 17.07.2019. The impugned proceedings dated 16.09.2020 were issued suspending him from service on the ground that he had misappropriated house tax and private tap fee collection amounts to a tune of Rs.57.27 lakhs in Lalacheruvu when he was posted there. Initially, proceedings dated 07.09.2020 were issued in which the District Collector had signed the suspension order. The petitioner challenged the same in a writ petition. Learned counsel submits that realizing a legal mistake, the fresh impugned proceedings was issued by the Commissioner for Panchayat Raj. It is his contention that the alleged failure to collect the money and/or misappropriating the same took place long prior to his transfer on 17.07.2009. In view of the fact that the petitioner is no longer working in the same area namely Lalacheruvu, he argues that there is no need or necessity to keep him under suspension. Apart from that, it is submitted that there is no independent application of the mind before the order of suspension was passed and by relying on an order of District Collector dated 07.09.2020, the impugned proceedings were issued. Lastly, relying on paras 8 and 9 of the writ affidavit, the learned counsel raised the point that as the petitioner is not posted at the place whether the alleged misappropriation took place and is not the custodian of the records, the question of his tampering the records, tampering with the case etc., will not arise. Therefore, learned counsel argues that the order is incorrect and deserves to be set aside. Learned counsel also filed a memo along with five reported cases and argued on the basis of the five cases that the Court can interfere in case of suspension also.In reply to this, learned Government Pleader for Services argues that the Court has limited jurisdiction to interfere in cases of suspension pending enquiry. He pointed out that the amounts collected for house tax and private tap fee from the house owners of the Grampanchayat were not remitted to the account of Grampanchayat thereby causing the loss. It is pointed out that only after a detailed enquiry was conducted, the action was taken. It is also mentioned in the counter that there is dereliction of duty as the petitioner entrusted the job to subordinate staff, contract staff and had failed to remit the amounts by defining on daily basis.Learned Government Pleader also argued that there is no infringement of the fundamental right of the petitioner nor is there any infringement of rules of natural justice. He argues that after the Extension Officer conducted enquiry, a show cause was also issued to the petitioner. Lastly, he submits that as per Rule 34 of the CCA Rules, there is an effective alternative remedy of filing an appeal. Therefore, he submits in conclusion that as there is no arbitrary exercise of power and as there is an effective alternative remedy, this Court should not interfere at the stage of the show cause notice.This Court after considering the submissions, the evidence on record and the pleadings notices that the law on the subject is not in doubt. Suspension per se is not a punishment. The power to suspend a Government servant in a State service is available under Rule 8 of the CCA Rules. This is not in dispute. However, it is also clear that as per the settled law, the suspension cannot be for an indefinite period. The State Government itself has issued G.Os directing the review of suspension to every six months. Apart from that, the law is also settled that the purpose of the suspension is as follows:(a) to deliver a message to a that the irresponsible conduct etc., will not be allowed(b) to prevent the suspended employee from interfering with the progress of the inquiry, influencing the witnesses etc and to ensure that the inquiry is completed smoothly(c) orders of suspension cannot be mechanically passed and there must be application of mind.If the records of this case are examined, it is clear that although the suspension was issued on 16.09.2020, till date, the departmental proceedings are not initiated. One year has passed. The petitioner has also come before this Court with a specific ground as mentioned in the writ affidavit that the alleged misappropriation and failure to supervise took place in Lalacheruvu Grampanchayat. Admittedly, the petitioner has left this post on transfer in July, 2019 itself. In paras 7 and 8 of his writ affidavit, the petitioner has specifically stated that he is not the custodian of the records, nor is he at the same place where the alleged misappropriation took place. He also states clearly that there cannot be any tampering of records or evidence, since he is working elsewhere. In the counter affidavit that is filed, these issues are not at all answered. Normally, suspension pending enquiry is justified on such grounds of likelihood of the witness tampering the evidence, influencing the witnesses etc. In the case on hand, the available record does not disclose that such an opinion has been formed by the respondents or is very likely to happen. The petitioner admittedly is not working in the same place and the suspension order is issued long after he is transferred.The counter affidavit filed shows that the Extension Officer has conducted an enquiry from February, 2020 itself. Ultimately, it appears that in July, 2020, he had submitted a report. Portions of that report are reproduced in the counter affidavit. The show cause given to the petitioner has also resulted in an explanation. At this stage itself, the amounts said to have been expended by the petitioner are also deducted before the final demand is made. Therefore, it is clear that the respondents are in possession of a certain amount of data to base their case. Therefore it is also not a case of suspension in order to complete the investigation or to facilitate the ascertainment of facts etc. In the reply affidavit, the petitioner has also brought certain additional facts to the notice of this Court. He also filed certain documents. Re-enquiry has been ordered by the Commissioner of Panchayat Raj into the alleged misappropriation. This is borne out by the proceedings dated 09.03.2020. On 10.03.2020, for this new preliminary re- enquiry, the petitioner was invited to attend. The petitioner also submitted a written reply or a note to this preliminary enquiry. As mentioned in the reply affidavit, the District Collector has yet not come to a firm conclusion in this re- enquiry and the District Panchayat Officer has also not submitted a report. This is a subsequent event that is brought to the courts notice.In the case of Ajay Kumar Choudary v. Union of India, 2015 (7) SCC 291 the Hon’ble Supreme Court noted that an extended suspension can cause trauma. There is a Division Bench judgment of this Court in WP.No.8185 of 2020, but to the knowledge of this Court, the same is now under challenge before the Hon’ble Supreme Court. The same is not being looked into for now. In State of Tamilnadu v. Pramod Kumar IPS, Civil Appeal No.8427-8428 of 2018 the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India relying upon Ajay Kumar Choudary’s case (1 supra) has held that on the basis of the available material, keeping the petitioner under protracted suspension is not called for. The Supreme Court also held that he should be reinstated into service.In conclusion, this Court is of the opinion that the order of suspension cannot be sustained now because:(1) there is no whisper nowhere in the entire set of documents filed or in the counter affidavits filed that the petitioner can still influence a witness or tamper with the record.(2) It is not the case of the respondents that further material has to be gathered, witnesses are being examined or that the records are being traced etc.(3) The reason for suspending the petitioner almost a year after his transfer from the post is not explained and there is no visible “application of mind” which is needed and a mechanical suspension order cannot be countenanced in law.(4) more that a year has elapsed without a review being conducted also and lastly,(5) prolonged suspension itself can amount to a punishment in a way.In the facts and circumstances of this case, this Court is of the opinion that the petitioner has to succeed. Therefore, there shall be an order as prayed for and the impugned order dated 16.09.2020 is set aside. It is hoped that the enquiry, if any, would be completed in a time bound and strict manner. The petitioner is also cautioned not to in any way interfere with the progress of the enquiry/interfere with the witnesses etc when the same is commenced against him.With these observations, the writ petition is allowed. No order as to costs. As a sequel, the miscellaneous petitions if any shall stand dismissed.