Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – Section 319 – Power to proceed against other persons appearing to be guilty of offence – Scope and ambit of the powers of the Court under Section 319 CrPC -Summarized.1. That while exercising the powers under Section 319 CrPC and to summon the persons not charge-sheeted, the entire effort is not to allow the real perpetrator of an offence to get away unpunished;2. For the empowerment of the courts to ensure that the criminal administration of justice works properly;3. The law has been properly codified and modified by the legislature under the CrPC indicating as to how the courts should proceed to ultimately find out the truth so that the innocent does not get punished but at the same time, the guilty are brought to book under the law;4. To discharge duty of the court to find out the real truth and to ensure that the guilty does not go unpunished;5. Where the investigating agency for any reason does not array one of the real culprits as an accused, the court is not powerless in calling the said accused to face trial;6. Section 319 CrPC allows the court to proceed against any person who is not an accused in a case before it;7. The court is the sole repository of justice and a duty is cast upon it to uphold the rule of law and, therefore, it will be inappropriate to deny the existence of such powers with the courts in our criminal justice system where it is not uncommon that the real accused, at times, get away by manipulating the investigating and/or the prosecuting agency;8. Section 319 CrPC is an enabling provision empowering the court to take appropriate steps for proceeding against any person not being an accused for also having committed the offence under trial;9. The power under Section 319(1) CrPC can be exercised at any stage after the charge-sheet is filed and before the pronouncement of judgment, except during the stage of Sections 207/208 CrPC, committal, etc. which is only a pretrial stage intended to put the process into motion;10. The court can exercise the power under Section 319 CrPC only after the trial proceeds and commences with the recording of the evidence;11. The word “evidence” in Section 319 CrPC means only such evidence as is made before the court, in relation to statements, and as produced before the court, in relation to documents;12. It is only such evidence that can be taken into account by the Magistrate or the court to decide whether the power under Section 319 CrPC is to be exercised and not on the basis of material collected during the investigation;13. If the Magistrate/court is convinced even on the basis of evidence appearing in examination-in-chief, it can exercise the power under Section 319 CrPC and can proceed against such other person(s);14. That the Magistrate/court is convinced even on the basis of evidence appearing in examination-in-chief, powers under Section 319 CrPC can be exercised;15. That power under Section 319 CrPC can be exercised even at the stage of completion of examination-in-chief and thecourt need not has to wait till the said evidence is tested on cross-examination;16. Even in a case where the stage of giving opportunity to the complainant to file a protest petition urging upon the trial court to summon other persons as well who were named in FIR but not implicated in the charge-sheet has gone, in that case also, the Court is still not powerless by virtue of Section 319 CrPC and even those persons named in FIR but not implicated in the charge-sheet can be summoned to face the trial, provided during the trial some evidence surfaces against the proposed accused (may be in the form of examination-in-chief of the prosecution witnesses);17. While exercising the powers under Section 319 CrPC the Court is not required and/or justified in appreciating the deposition/evidence of the prosecution witnesses on merits which is required to be done during the trial.For Petitioner(s) Mr. Gurinder Singh Gill, Sr. Adv. Mr. P.P. Nayak, Adv. Mr. Kuldeep Singh Kuchaliya, Adv. Ms. Aashna Gill, Adv. Mr. Pratap Singh Gill, Adv. Ms. Bhupinder, Adv. Ms. Vandana Hooda, Adv. Mr. Ajay Pal, AOR For Respondent(s) Mr. Neeraj, AAG Mr. Ankit Raj, Adv. Mr. Satya Ranjan Swian, Adv. Mr. Vedansh Anand, Adv. Dr. Monika Gusain, AOR Mr. Atul Kumar, Adv. Mr. Abhimanyu Sharma, Adv. Ms. Deepali, Adv. Mr. Tarun Gupta, Adv.M. R. Shah, J.1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned Judgment and Order passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in CRR No.28 of 2018 by which the High Court has dismissed the said Revision Application preferred by the appellant herein and has confirmed the order passed by the Learned Sessions Judge dated 05.09.2017 by which the Additional Sessions Judge dismissed an application under Section 319 CrPC moved by the appellant herein for summoning the Respondent Nos. 2 to 5 herein as additional accused in the case FIR No.477 dated 27.07.2016 for the offences under Sections 302, 307, 341, 148 & 149 IPC registered at Police Station Assandh, the appellant/victim has preferred the present appeal.2. An FIR No.477 dated 27.07.2016 was registered at Police Station Assandh on the basis of the statement of one Rann Singh, regarding the death of his son Amarjit Singh and the injuries having been suffered by the present appellant – Manjeet Singh. That as per the statement of Rann Singh his son Amarjit Singh and his nephew Manjeet Singh were attacked by Sartaj Singh, Tejpal Singh and Sukhpal Singh sons of Gurdev Singh, Parab Sharan Singh and Preet Samrat sons of Mohan Sarup while they were on their way back home after purchasing the pesticides meant for paddy in their car. They parked their Mahendera XUV 500 belonging to Sartaj Singh and blocked the road. They were armed with weapons and when his son Amarjit Singh followed by Manjeet Singh stepped out from his car to get the road cleared, Sartaj Singh fired four shots from his licenced revolver, which hit the left side of the chest, stomach andelbow of Amarjit Singh. Sartaj Singh fired indiscriminately from his licenced revolver, which also hit the nephew Manjeet Singh on the chest near the right shoulder. Amarjit Singh died on spot and Manjeet Singh was admitted in the hospital, as per the statement of Rann Singh.2.1 A cross-case was also registered at the behest of Sartaj Singh, the accused in the FIR on 28.07.2016 which was recorded against the complainant side in FIR No.477 dated 27.07.2016. In the crosscase the allegations were made against Manjeet Singh, Narvair Singh and other persons namely Palwinder Singh son of Rann Singh, Satkar Singh son of Rajwant Singh, Rajwant Singh son of Gurcharan Singh and Sukhdeep Singh son of Satnam Singh where it was alleged that all the persons inflicted injuries on his person.2.2 The matter was investigated and after investigation, a final report was filed only against Sartaj Singh in FIR No.477. All other accused were exonerated and were kept in column no.2. In cross case, one of the accused died and a challan was filed against two persons where four of them namely Palwinder Singh, Rajwant Singh, Sukhdeep Singh and Satkar Singh were kept in column no.2.2.3 The case was committed to the Court of Sessions and the trial begin in both the cases namely arising out of FIR No.477 dated 27.07.2016 and the cross case. That during the trial arising out of FIR No.477, appellant herein came to be examined as PW1. In the deposition, he reiterated the allegations made in the FIR including the allegations made against the private respondents herein namely Sukhpal Singh, Tejpal Singh, Parab Sharan and Preet Samrat and reiterated what was stated in the FIR. He came to be crossexamined partly and during the cross-examination, an application under Section 319 CrPC was given on behalf of the complainant for summoning of Sukhpal Singh, Tejpal Singh, Parab Sharan and Preet Samrat as additional accused. Further cross-examination of PW1 came to be deferred. That by order dated 05.09.2017, the Learned trial Court dismissed the application under Section 319 CrPC for summoning Sukhpal Singh, Tejpal Singh, Parab Sharan and Preet Samrat as additional accused to face trial arising out of FIR No.477 of 2016.3. In the cross case arising out of the complaint given by Sukhpal Singh recorded on 28.07.2016 (accused in FIR No. 477 dated 27.07.2016) the prosecution examined Sukhpal Singh as PW1, Dr.Mahinder, the Medical Officer as PW2 and one Bhupinder Singh as PW7. That thereafter the said Sartaj Singh filed an application before the Learned trial Court under Section 319 CrPC for summoning Palwinder Singh, Sartaj Singh, Rajwant Singh and Sukhdeep Singh as additional accused. On the basis of the evidence recorded the Learned trial Court after considering the statements of Sartaj Singh and other eye witnesses and the material on record allowed the application under Section 319 CrPC vide order dated 21.04.2018 and directed to issue summons against Palwinder Singh, Satkar Singh, Rajwant Singh and Sukhdeep Singh.4. Being aggrieved and dissatisfied with the order dated 05.09.2017 passed by the Learned trial Court rejecting the application under Section 319 CrPC in FIR No.477 and refusing to issue summons against Sukhpal Singh, Tejpal Singh, Parab Sharan and Preet Samrat as additional accused, the appellant herein – Manjeet Singh – victim preferred a revision application before the High Court which was numbered as CRR 28 of 2018. Against the order passed by the Learned trial Court dated 21.04.2018 by which an application under Section 319 CrPC filed by Sartaj Singh in a cross case summoning Palwinder Singh, SatkarSingh, Rajwant Singh and Sukhdeep Singh came to be allowed, Satkar Singh and others filed a revision application before the High Court being CRR No.3238 of 2018.5. By the impugned Judgment and Order dated 28.08.2020 the High Court dismissed CRR No.28 of 2018 filed by Manjeet Singh. It was filed challenging the order passed by Learned trial Court dated 05.09.2017 rejecting the application under Section 319 CrPC for summoning Sukhpal Singh, Tejpal Singh, Parab Sharan and Preet Samrat as additional accused to face the trial arising out of FIR No.477 of 2016. By the very common judgment and order, the High Court allowed CRR No. 3238 of 2018 filed by Satkar Singh and others and quashed and set aside the order passed by the Learned trial Court dated 21.04.2018 arising out of cross case by which Palwinder Singh, Satkar Singh, Rajwant Singh and Sukhdeep Singh were summoned to face the trial, the application which was given by Sartaj Singh under Section 319 CrPC.6. Sartaj Singh feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment and order passed by the High Court in CRR 3238 of 2018 by which the High Court set aside the order passed by the trial Court dated 28.07.2016 summoning Palwinder Singh, Satkar Singh,Rajwant Singh and Sukhdeep Singh under Section 319 CrPC, approached this Court vide Criminal Appeal No.298-299 of 2021. By detailed judgment and order this very Bench vide judgment and order dated 15.03.2021 allowed the said appeal and set aside the order passed by the High Court passed in CRR No.3238 of 2018 and restored the order passed by the Learned trial Court arising out of a cross case given by Sartaj Singh dated 28.07.2016.7. That thereafter the present appellant herein Manjeet Singh has preferred the present appeal challenging the order passed by the High Court passed in CRR 28 of 2018 by which the High Court has confirmed the order passed by the Learned trial Court dismissing an application under Section 319 CrPC to summon private respondents herein as additional accused and to face the trial arising out of FIR No.477 of 2016 dated 27.07.20168. Shri G.S. Gill, Learned Senior Advocate has appeared on behalf of Manjeet Singh and Shri Ankit Raj, Learned Advocate has appeared on behalf of the respondent – State and Shri R. Basant, Learned Senior Advocate has appeared on behalf of private respondents herein.8.1 Shri Gill, Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of Manjeet Singh has vehemently submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the case, both, the Learned trial Court as well as the High Court have committed a grave error in rejecting the application under Section 319 CrPC to summon the private respondents herein to face the trial arising out of FIR No. 477 dated 27.07.2016.8.2 It is submitted that while rejecting the application under Section 319 CrPC, the Learned trial Court as well as the High Court have not properly appreciated and considered the scope, ambit and powers under Section 319 CrPC.8.3 It is submitted that by not allowing the application under Section 319 CrPC and not summoning the private respondents herein as additional accused, both, the Learned trial Court as well as the High Court have not exercised the powers vested under Section 319 CrPC.8.4 Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has submitted that even the reasons assigned by the High Court while dismissing the revision application and confirming the order passed by the High Court refusing to summon the private respondent as additional accused are not sustainable in law and on facts.8.5 It is further submitted that while passing the impugned order, the High Court has not appreciated the fact that all the private respondents herein who were sought to be arraigned as additional accused were specifically named in the FIR No.477. It is submitted that even in the deposition the appellant herein – PW1 has also specifically named the private respondents herein with their specific role. It is submitted that therefore the Learned trial Court ought to have exercised the powers under Section 319 CrPC and ought to have summoned the private respondents as additional accused.8.6 It is submitted that as held by this Court in catena of decisions and more particularly in Hardeep Singh v. State of Punjab (2014) 3 SCC 92, even on the basis of the statement made in the examinationin- chief of the witnesses concerned the Court can in exercise of powers under Section 319 CrPC summon the persons even named in the examination-in-chief as additional accused and to face the trial. It is submitted that in the present case not only the names of the private respondents have been disclosed in the examination-in-chief of the appellant – victim but they were named in the FIR also with specific role.8.7 It is submitted that even the accused can be convicted on the basis of the evidence of a single witness. It is submitted that in the present case the appellant is the injured eye witness and as observed and held by this Court in the recent decision Lakshman Singh vs. State of Bihar (now Jharkhand) (Criminal Appeal No.606 of 2021) decided on 23rd July, 2021) unless there are compelling circumstances and reasons normally and by and large the injured eye-witness should be believed. It is submitted that even otherwise the appellant is subjected to cross-examination. It is submitted that therefore merely because there may be one witness and/or statement of only one person, is no ground not to summon the additional accused in exercise of powers under Section 319 CrPC.8.8 It is further submitted that at this stage the High Court was not justified in appreciating the deposition/evidence of the appellant on merits. It is submitted that the things which are required to be done during the trial, have been done by the High Court at this stage of summoning the additional accused in exercise of powers under Section 319 CrPC. It is submitted that the aforesaid is wholly impermissible at the stage of considering an application under Section 319 CrPC. It is vehemently submitted that as held by thisCourt in the case of Hardeep Singh (Supra); Sukhpal Singh Khaira v. State of Punjab (2019) 6 SCC 638 and in other subsequent decisions at the stage of considering the application under Section 319 CrPC the High Court is not justified in entering into the merits and/or appreciation of the evidence on merits, which is required to be considered at the stage of trial.8.9 It is submitted that even the reasoning given by the High Court dismissing the revision application while confirming the order passed by the Learned trial Court dismissing the application under Section 319 CrPC are not sustainable in law. It is submitted that while passing the impugned judgment and order, the High Court is not justified in entering into the allegations and the evidence on merits which is wholly impermissible at this stage as held by this Court in the aforesaid decisions and other decisions.8.10 It is submitted that the High Court has failed to notice that the allegations against the original accused as well as the private respondents herein are for the aforesaid offences under Sections 148 & 149 IPC also. It is submitted that as per the settled law while considering the charge under Section 149 IPC the individual role and overt act by each accused is not relevant and/or material and it issufficient that accused is a part of the unlawful assembly. (See Masalti v. State of U.P, AIR 1965 SC 202 & Shambhu Nath Singh And Ors. v. State Of Bihar, AIR 1960 SC 725). It is submitted that therefore when the High Court has observed that no injury has been attributed to either of the respondents except that they were armed with weapons and therefore they cannot be arrayed as additional accused, is unsustainable and contrary to the law laid down by this Court in catena of decisions on Section 149 of IPC.8.11 It is submitted that even the observations made by the High Court that it cannot be said that the private respondents had any common intention or there was meeting of mind that Sartaj Singh would be firing are unwarranted at this stage. It is submitted that at this stage the Court is not required to enter into the merits of the allegations and/or the evidence. It is submitted that therefore while making above observations while rejecting the application under Section 319 CrPC the High Court has not exercised its powers vested under Section 319 CrPC.8.12 It is submitted that even in the facts and circumstances of the case the High Court has committed a grave error in relying upon the decision of this Court in the case of Brijendra Singh vs. State ofRajasthan, (2017) 7 SCC 706. It is submitted that in the present case if we go through and consider the final report by which the private respondents herein were to be in column no. 2 there do not seem to be any evidence discussed and/or specific allegations considered against the private respondents herein. It is submitted that the private respondents herein are put at column no.2. on the basis of the reports of HC Baljinder Singh, HPS, DSP Assandh and Shri Kushal Pal, HPS, DSP Indri, who as such are not even the Investigating Officer and even the reports if any, are part of the charge-sheet nor the aforesaid officers are cited as witnesses. It is submitted therefore as such no proper investigation has been carried out against the private respondents herein and without discussing the specific allegations against the private respondents herein which have been made in the FIR, the private respondents herein are kept in column no.2. It is submitted that therefore the decision in the case of Brijendra Singh (Supra), would not be applicable to the facts of the case on hand.8.13 Making above submissions and relying upon the decisions in the cases of Hardeep Singh (Supra); S. Mohammed Ispahani vs. Yogendra Chandak (2017) 16 SCC 226; Rajesh vs. State ofHaryana, (2019) 6 SCC 368 and the recent decision of this Court in the case of Sartaj Singh vs. State of Haryana, 2021 (4) Scale 227, which was arising out of the cross case in the very case, it is prayed to allow the present appeal and quash and set aside the order passed by the Learned trial Court as well as the High Court and consequently allow the application under Section 319 CrPC to summon the private respondents herein to face the trial arising out of cross case dated 28.07.2016 for the offences under Sections 302, 307, 341, 148 & 149 IPC.9. Shri Ankit Raj, Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the State has surprisingly supported the private respondents herein and had submitted that in the present case, both, the Learned trial Court as well as the High Court have rightly dismissed the application under Section 319 CrPC and have rightly refused to summon the private respondents herein as additional accused.10. Present appeal is vehemently opposed by Shri R. Basant, Learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the private respondent herein.10.1 While opposing the present appeal and supporting the impugned judgment and order passed by the trial Court as well as theHigh Court Shri Basant, Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of private respondents herein has made following submissions:(i) That in the facts and circumstances of the case no error has been committed by the courts below in rejecting the application under Section 319 CrPC and refusing to summon the private respondents herein as additional accused;(ii) That cogent reasons have been given by, both, the Learned trial Court as well as the High Court refusing to summon the private respondents herein as additional accused;(iii) That though a common judgment and order was passed by the High Court in CRR No.28 of 2018 and CRR 3238 of 2018, when Sartaj Singh the original complainant in cross case dated 28.07.2016 approached this Court by way of Criminal Appeal No.298-299 of 2021, at that stage the appellant herein did not challenge the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court passed in CRR No.28 of 2018. It is submitted that only thereafter when number of witnesses have been examined and thetrial is at the fag-end, the present appeal has been preferred. Therefore, it is prayed not to exercise the powers under Article 136;(iv) That in the present case even the inquiry was conducted by four high rank officials and only thereafter the Investigating Officer put/kept the private respondents herein in column no.2. It is submitted that during the course of the investigation and even thereafter in the inquiry four DSPs which were conducting at the instance of the Rann Singh – original complainant and when there was no evidence found the private respondents herein are kept in column no.2;(v) It is submitted that in the case of Brijendra Singh (Supra) it is observed by this Court that when the evidence has been collected by the IO during the investigation and thereafter having found no evidence against the accused named in the FIR and thereafter they are kept in column no.2, the same is required to be considered seriously and/or having greater value than the deposition of thecomplainant and some other persons in their examination-in-chief;(vi) That when initially after investigation the private respondents herein were put/kept in column no.2, though they were having an opportunity on the part of the complainant to submit the protest application, they failed to do so and thereafter after recording the deposition of PW1 – appellant herein when the cross-examination of the said witness was going on, the complainant filed an application under Section 319 CrPC;(vii) That except the bare statements of the appellant who himself is an accused in the cross case, there is no further material/evidence on record and therefore, both, the Learned trial Court as well as the High Court have rightly refused to summon the private respondents herein as additional accused.10.2 Making above submissions and relying upon the decision of this Court in the case of Brijendra Singh (Supra) it is prayed to dismiss the present appeal.11. Heard Learned Counsels for the respective parties at length.12. What is under challenge in the present appeal is the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court dismissing the revision application preferred by the appellant herein and confirming the order passed by the Learned trial Court rejecting the application under Section 319 CrPC on behalf of the complainant and refusing to summon the private respondents herein as additional accused.12.1 While considering the rival submissions the law on the scope and ambit of Section 319 CrPC is required to be considered. In the recent decision in the case of Sartaj Singh (Supra) this very Bench has considered in detail the law on the scope and ambit of Section 319 CrPC. In the said decision this court considered the decisions in the cases of Hardeep Singh (Supra); S. Mohammed Ispahani v. Yogendra Chandak (Supra) and Rajesh (Supra) in detail. The relevant part of the aforesaid decisions which came to be considered by this Court are as under:13. The ratio of the aforesaid decisions on the scope and ambit of the powers of the Court under Section 319 CrPC can be summarized as under:14. Applying the law laid down in the aforesaid decisions to the facts of the case on hand we are of the opinion that the Learned trial Court as well as the High Court have materially erred in dismissing the application under Section 319 CrPC and refusing to summon theprivate respondents herein to face the trial in exercising the powers under Section 319 CrPC. It is required to be noted that in the FIR No.477 all the private respondents herein who are sought to be arraigned as additional accused were specifically named with specific role attributed to them. It is specifically mentioned that while they were returning back, Mahendra XUV bearing no. HR-40A-4352 was standing on the road which belongs to Sartaj Singh and Sukhpal. Tejpal, Parab Saran Singh, Preet Samrat and Sartaj were standing. Parab Sharan was having lathi in his hand, Tejpal was having a gandsi, Sukhpal was having a danda, Sartaj was having a revolver and Preet Singh was sitting in the jeep. It is specifically mentioned in the FIR that all the aforesaid persons with common intention parked the Mahendra XUV HR-40A-4352 in a manner which blocks the entire road and they were armed with the weapons. Despite the above specific allegations, when the charge-sheet/final report came to be filed only two persons came to be charge-sheeted and the private respondents herein though named in the FIR were put/kept in column no.2. It is the case on behalf of the private respondents herein that four different DSPs inquired into the matter and thereafter when no evidence was found against them the private respondents hereinwere put in column no.2 and therefore the same is to be given much weightage rather than considering/believing the examination-in-chief of the appellant herein. Heavy reliance is placed on the case of Brijendra Singh (Supra). However none of DSPs and/or their reports, if any, are part of the charge-sheet. None of the DSPs are shown as witnesses. None of the DSPs are Investigating Officer. Even on considering the final report/charge-sheet as a whole there does not appear to be any consideration on the specific allegations qua the accused the private respondents herein who are kept in column no.2. Entire discussion in the charge-sheet/final report is against Sartaj Singh only. So far as the private respondents are concerned only thing which is stated is “During the investigation of the present case, Shri Baljinder Singh, HPS, DSP Assandh and Shri Kushalpal, HPS, DSP Indri found accused Tejpal Singh, Sukhpal Singh, sons of Gurdev Singh, Parab Sharan Singh and Preet Samrat Singh sons of Mohan Sarup Singh caste Jat Sikh, residents of Bandrala innocent and accordingly Sections 148, 149 and 341 of the IPC were deleted in the case and they were kept in column no.2, whereas challan against accused Sartaj has been presented in the Court.”14.1 Now thereafter when in the examination-in-chief the appellant herein – victim – injured eye witness has specifically named the private respondents herein with specific role attributed to them, the Learned trial Court as well as the High Court ought to have summoned the private respondents herein to face the trial. At this stage it is required to be noted that so far as the appellant herein is concerned he is an injured eye-witness. As observed by this Court in the cases of State of MP v. Mansingh (2003) 10 SCC 414 (para 9); Abdul Sayeed v. State of MP (2010) 10 SCC 259; State of Uttar Pradesh v. Naresh (2011) 4 SCC 324, the evidence of an injured eye witness has greater evidential value and unless compelling reasons exist, their statements are not to be discarded lightly. As observed hereinabove while exercising the powers under Section 319 CrPC the Court has not to wait till the cross-examination and on the basis of the examination-in-chief of a witness if a case is made out, a person can be summoned to face the trial under Section 319 CrPC.14.2 Now so far as the reasoning given by the High Court while dismissing the revision application and confirming the order passed by the Learned trial Court dismissing the application under Section 319 CrPC is concerned, the High Court itself has observed that PW1Manjeet Singh is the injured witness and therefore his presence cannot be doubted as he has received fire arm injuries along with the deceased. However, thereafter the High Court has observed that the statement of Manjeet Singh indicates over implication and that no injury has been attributed to either of the respondents except they were armed with weapons and the concerned injuries are attributed only to Sartaj Singh even for the sake of arguments someone was present with Sartaj Singh it cannot be said that they had any common intention or there was meeting of mind or knew that Sartaj would be firing. The aforesaid reasonings are not sustainable at all. At the stage of exercising the powers under Section 319 CrPC, the Court is not required to appreciate and/or enter on the merits of the allegations of the case. The High Court has lost sight of the fact that the allegations against all the accused persons right from the very beginning were for the offences under Sections 302, 307, 341, 148 & 149 IPC. The High Court has failed to appreciate the fact that for attracting the offence under Section 149 IPC only forming part of unlawful assembly is sufficient and the individual role and/or overt act is immaterial. Therefore, the reasoning given by the High Court that no injury has been attributed to either of the respondents except thatthey were armed with weapons and therefore, they cannot be added as accused is unsustainable. The Learned trial Court and the High Court have failed to exercise the jurisdiction and/or powers while exercising the powers under Section 319 CrPC.14.3 Now so far as the submission on behalf of the private respondents that though a common judgment and order was passed by the High Court in CRR No.3238 of 2018 at that stage the appellant herein did not prefer appeal against the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court in CRR No.28 of 2018 and therefore this Court may not exercise the powers under Section Article 136 is concerned the aforesaid has no substance. Once it is found that the Learned trial Court as well as the High Court ought to have summoned the private respondents herein as additional accused, belated filing of the appeal or not filing the appeal at a relevant time when this Court considered the very judgment and order but in CRR No.3238 of 2018 cannot be a ground not to direct to summons the private respondents herein when this Court has found that a prima facie case is made out against the private respondents herein and they are to be summoned to face the trial.14.4 Now so far as the submission on behalf of the private respondents that though in the charge-sheet the private respondents herein were put in column no.2 at that stage the complainant side did not file any protest application is concerned, the same has been specifically dealt with by this Court in the case of Rajesh (Supra). This Court in the aforesaid decision has specifically observed that even in a case where the stage of giving opportunity to the complainant to file a protest petition urging upon the trial Court to summon other persons as well as who were named in the FIR but not implicated in the charge-sheet has gone, in that case also, the court is still not powerless by virtue of Section 319 CrPC.14.5 Similarly, the submission on behalf of the private respondents herein that after the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court there is a much progress in the trial and therefore at this stage power under Section 319 CrPC may not be exercised is concerned, the aforesaid has no substance and cannot be accepted. As per the settled preposition of law and as observed by this Court in the case of Hardeep Singh (Supra), the powers under Section 319 CrPC can be exercised at any stage before the final conclusion of the trial. Even otherwise it is required to be noted that at the time whenthe application under Section 319 CrPC was given only one witness was examined and examination-in-chief of PW1 was recorded and while the cross-examination of PW1 was going on, application under Section 319 CrPC was given which came to be rejected by the Learned trial Court. The Order passed by the Learned trial Court is held to be unsustainable. If the Learned trial Court would have summoned the private respondents herein at that stage such a situation would not have arisen. Be that as it may as observed herein powers under Section 319 CrPC can be exercised at any stage from commencing of the trial and recording of evidence/deposition and before the conclusion of the trial at any stage.15. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court and that of the Learned trial Court dismissing the application under Section 319 CrPC submitted on behalf of the complainant to summon the private respondents herein as additional accused are unsustainable and deserve to be quashed and set aside and are accordingly quashed and set aside. Consequently the application submitted on behalf of the complainant to summon the private respondents herein is hereby allowed and the Learned trial Court is directed to summon the privaterespondents herein to face the trial arising out of FIR No.477 dated 27.07.2016 in Sessions Case No.362 of 2016 for the offences punishable under Sections 302, 307, 341, 148 & 149 IPC. However, it is specifically observed that the observations made hereinabove are only prima facie for the purpose of exercising the powers under Section 319 CrPC and the Learned trial Court to decide and dispose of the trial in accordance with the law and on its own merits and on the basis of the evidence to be laid before it.Appeal is allowed accordingly.