Administrative Law – The Court cannot be a silent spectator to any mal- administration, dereliction of duty and breakdown of the law and order situation and the failure of a statutory authority to act in accordance with law especially when allegations have been made of acting under the influence and dictation of a Minister.Constitution of India – Article 226 – The jurisdiction of the High Court is wide enough to be exercised in case of error apparent on the face of record, failure to exercise jurisdiction, exercising jurisdiction contrary to the provisions of law and also to do substantial justice.Service Law – Disqualification – Resignation – Whether the disqualification is a foregone conclusion in view of the resignation of the petitioners and the denial of the resignation by other three members are in an issue which will have to be decided only when the application for disqualification is found to be in form and the prescribed authority is found to have acted according to law and not under dictation or influence.Panchayat Act, 1973 (West Bengal) – Section 213A (12) – The prescribed authority was directed by the Court to dispose of the application in accordance with law. Such direction should not be interpreted as a mandate of the Court upon the prescribed authority to deal with and dispose of the said application in hot haste and without applying his mind to the provisions of the statute and the points raised by the petitioners.Mr. K.J. Tewari, Mr. T.J. Tewari. …for the petitioners. Mr. Debabrata Chatterjee, Mr. Kapil Guha. ..for the Respondent Nos.4 & 5. Mr. Jishunu Chowdhury, Mr. Simanta Kabir. … for Respondent No.9. Mr. Kishore Dutta, Ld. A.G., Mr. Anirban Ray, Ld. G.P. Mr. L.M. Mahata, Ld. A.G.P., Mr. Raja Saha, Mr. A.K. Ghosh. … for the State.At the very outset, this Court is of the of opinion that Abdul Mannan Khan, Anjura Bibi Tarafdar and Champa Bibi Tarafdar should be added as respondents in this proceeding.Service of the writ petition upon the added respondents. Let such addition be made here and now.The Court is of the opinion that these persons are necessary for disposal of the proceeding as the learned Advocate General has raised a question of misrepresentation and forgery of the signatures of these persons in the letter of resignation. The writ petition has been filed challenging an order dated August 11, 2021 passed by the prescribed authority under Section 213A of the West Bengal Panchayat Act.The learned Advocate General, learned Government Pleader represent the respondent nos.1- 3 and 6 & 7. Mr. Jishnu Chowdhury, learned Additional Government Pleader represents the respondent no.9.Mr. Kapil Guha, learned Advocate represents the respondent nos.4 & 5.None appears on behalf of the respondent no.8. The learned Advocates for the respondents have raised a point of maintainability of the writ petition as there is a provision of appeal under Section 213A (12) of the West Bengal Panchayat Act, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the “said Act”). It is submitted by the learned Advocate General that the decision of the Hon’ble Apex Court in the matter of Whirlpool Corporation Vs. Registrar of Trade Marks, Mumbai reported in (1988) 8 SCC 1 would not be applicable in this case. It is submitted that the three exceptions carved out by the Hon’ble Apex Court when alternative remedy would not be a bar and the jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India could be invoked, are not present in this case and as such the petitioners should prefer an appeal against the order impugned. The learned Advocate General submits that exceptions to the rule of alternate remedy are as follows:“(a) the writ petition has been filed for the enforcement of a fundamental right protected by Part III of the Constitution;(b) there has been a violation of the principles of natural justice;(c) the order of proceedings are wholly without jurisdiction; or(d) the vires of a legislation is challenged;”This objection of the respondents is not prima facie, accepted at this stage in the factual background of this case. In the matter of A.V. Venkateswaran, Collector of Customs, Bombay vs. Ramchand Sobhraj Wadhwani and anr. reported in AIR 1961 SC 1506, the Hon’ble Apex Court held that the principle that a party who applies for issue of a high prerogative writ, should before he approaches the High Court, exhaust other remedies available to him under the law, is not one which bars the jurisdiction of the High Court to entertain the petition or to deal with it, but rather a rule which the courts have laid down for exercise of their discretion. The existence of other legal remedies or alternative remedies are not per se a bar to the issue of a writ of certiorari and the High Court is not bound to relegate the party to the other legal remedies available to him.In the case of Ramesh Chandra Sankla vs. Vikram Cement, reported in (2008) 14 SCC 58, the Apex Court held that the powers conferred upon the High Court under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India was to be exercised ex debito justitiae, that is, to meet the ends of justice.The jurisdiction of the Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is wide enough to be exercised in case of error apparent on the face of record, failure to exercise jurisdiction, exercising jurisdiction contrary to the provisions of law and also to do substantial justice.It is settled law that non-entertainment of petitions under writ jurisdiction by the High Court when an efficacious alternative remedy is available is a rule of self-imposed limitation. It is essentially a rule of policy, convenience and discretion rather than a rule of law. Undoubtedly, it is within the discretion of the High Court to grant relief under Article 226 despite the existence of an alternative remedy. However, the High Court usually does not interfere if there is an adequate, efficacious alternative remedy available to the petitioner and he has approached the High Court without availing the same unless, he has made out an exceptional case warranting such interference or there exist sufficient grounds to invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226. The Court, in extraordinary circumstances, may exercise the power if it comes to the conclusion that there has been a breach of the principles of natural justice or the procedure required for such decision has not been adopted. Thus, while it can be said that the Apex Court has recognized some other exceptions to the rule of alternative remedy but, where the statutory authority has not acted in accordance with the provisions of the enactment in question, or has acted in defiance of the fundamental principles of propriety and rule of law the court can interfere.The prescribed authority was directed by this Court in a previous writ petition to dispose of the application under Section 213A of the said Act filed by the respondent no.8, in accordance with law. Such direction should not be interpreted as a mandate of the Court upon the prescribed authority to deal with and dispose of the said application in hot haste and without applying his mind to the provisions of the statute and the points raised by the petitioners.The previous conduct by the Block Development Officer are matters of record. From the order dated August 6, 2021, it would appear that the prescribed authority adopted conflicting stands while discharging his functions under Section 12 of the said Act. Whenever, there has been a motion/requisition before the said prescribed authority to call for a meeting for removal of the Pradhan at the instance of the petitioners and some other members, the prescribed authority even after calling such meetings on two occasions had postponed those meetings, which prima facie gives rise to a presumption that the prescribed authority was not confident about the manner and procedure in which he must discharge his statutory function as an administrative authority. He has withdrawn from his decisions to hold the meeting for removal of the Pradhan by adjourning the same. Thus relegating the petitioners to the appellate forum in the facts of this case, would amount to the Court ignoring some serious issues, which reflect the dismal situation of the administration in Bhatjungla Gram Panchayat, Krishnagar. The appellate authority is also functioning within this system and the consideration here is whether the remedy of appeal will be effective and efficacious.Allegations have been made that the impugned order, disqualifying the petitioners was passed by the prescribed authority under the influence of a particular Minister who was present during the hearing and had held a closed door meeting with the prescribed authority. Specific pleadings have been made to that effect. Further allegations have been made that the learned advocate representing the petitioners faced life threats when he entered into the premises to attend the hearing. E-mails have been annexed to the writ petition addressed to the prescribed authority, which show that the petitioners had intimated the prescribed authority that it was not possible for them to attend the hearing because they were afraid of their safety and security and had been warned to keep away. Last of all it has been alleged that the order was passed at 9.00 p.m. on August 11, 2021 much beyond office hours and August 13, 2021 was fixed for holding the meeting for removal of the Pradhan.Thus prima facie, I find grounds to entertain the writ petition as extraordinary situation requires extraordinary measures.Having set out the backdrop in which the impugned order has been passed, this Court now proceeds to deal with the order impugned itself.The first contention of the petitioners is that the application under Section 213A filed by the respondent no.8 was not in the prescribed form and it did not contain the documents that were necessary to be filed as per the law, along with the said application. Such contention of the petitioners has not been dealt with in the order at all. The second contention of the petitioners is that even if the respondent no.8 is accepted as the leader of a particular political party, the application was not recommended either by the General Secretary or by the Secretary of the District Unit of such recognized political party. The allegation of violation of the provisions of sub-Section (7) of Section 213A has not been dealt with by the prescribed authority. Instead, to cover up for this irregularity, the prescribed authority has quoted a provision of law, which in my prima facie view, does not have any application and cannot be used as a reason to accept the application lodged by the respondent no.8 without adjudicating its maintainability. The relevant portion of the decision of this Court in the matter of Md. Abu Sattar Molla Vs. State of West Bengal & Ors. reported in (1997) 1 CHN 59 is quoted below :-Thus, where a power is given to an authority to do a certain thing in a certain way, it must be done in that way or not at all. The prescribed authority first ought to have satisfied himself that the application under Section 213A was in terms of the provisions of law. Prima facie, he did not have any jurisdiction or discretion to allow the application recommended by the Chairman which was not in the prescribed form. Reference may be made to the decision in State through P.S. Lodhi Colony New Delhi vs. Sanjeev Nanda reported in AIR 2012 SC 3014.It is a settled principle of law that if something is required to be done in a particular manner, then that has to be done only in that way or not, at all. In Nazir Ahmad vs. King Emperor, reported in AIR 1936 PC (2) it was held that where a power is given to do a certain thing in a certain way, the thing must be done in that way or not at all.Another judgment where this principle has been reiterated is Rashmi Rekha Thatoi and anr. vs. State of Orissa and ors. reported in (2012) 5 SCC 690 where it was observed that it is to be borne in mind that a court of law has to act within the statutory command and not deviate from it. It is a well-settled proposition of law that, what cannot be done directly, cannot be done indirectly.On August 4, 2021, when the hearing was held, the prescribed authority directed the respondent no.8 to furnish documents for satisfaction of the prescribed authority. Documents in terms of sub-sections (3),(7),(8)&(9) of Section 213A of the said Act was called for by the prescribed authority. It was specifically recorded in the order of August 4, 2021 that the documentary evidence in support of the statements made in the application under Section 213 A of the said Act, could not be produced by the respondent no.8. The petitioners prayed for two weeks time before the prescribed authority in order to prove that six persons resigned from the particular political party and the anti defection law would not apply. A week’s time was given and the hearing was fixed on August 11, 2021. From the order impugned, it does not appear that the respondent no.8 furnished the supporting documents which were called for by the prescribed authority in his previous order. The order had been passed only on the basis of the oral statement of three other members whom this Court has directed to be impleaded in this proceeding. Such persons alleged fraud, forgery and mis-representation. These are serious allegations against the petitioners and the authority ought to have allowed cross-examination or at least an opportunity to the petitioners to deal with their statements. Moreover, the respondent no.8, at whose instance the order impugned was passed is not present before this Court to support his application under Section 213A.There are other facts connected to this proceeding, inasmuch as, August 13, 2021 11.00 a.m. was fixed by this court for holding the meeting for removal of the Pradhan on the basis of a requisition in which the petitioners were signatories along with others. As the meeting has failed, the Court does not make any comment on the result of the meeting but prima facie, the action of the prescribed authority in passing the order in hot haste on August 11 at 9.00 p.m., without considering any of the points raised by the petitioners and without requiring the respondent no.8 to submit the documents which he had called for on an earlier occasion, does not prima facie inspire the confidence in the Court that the prescribed authority had acted bona fide and in accordance with law.Affidavits have to be filed by the state respondents, police authorities and by the respondent no.9 in his personal capacity. The Court cannot be a silent spectator to any mal- administration, dereliction of duty and breakdown of the law and order situation and the failure of a statutory authority to act in accordance with law especially when allegations have been made of acting under the influence and dictation of a Minister. The identity of the Minister is also on record.The contention of the learned Advocate General that when the three petitioners had voluntarily resigned they had defected and the order impugned does not suffer from any illegality as it was a foregone conclusion, is one on the merits. This court is now considering the procedure adopted by the statutory authority and his conduct which has given rise to extra-ordinary circumstances which call for court’s interference. There is no quarrel with the proposition that the prescribed authority has the power to proceed under the law and take such decisions as he deems fit and proper and this Court is not making any observation at this stage as to whether the anti defection law shall be applicable or not. Whether the disqualification is a foregone conclusion in view of the resignation of the petitioners and the denial of the resignation by other three members are in an issue which will have to be decided only when the application for disqualification is found to be in form and the prescribed authority is found to have acted according to law and not under dictation or influence. The interference of the Court is called for in this matter in the special facts and circumstances, as has been pointed out hereinabove, unless the contrary is before this Court in the form of counter affidavits. The order dated August 11, 2021 is liable to be stayed. The said order shall not be given effect to for a period of three months or until further orders whichever is earlier.Let affidavit in opposition be filed within four weeks from date; reply thereto, if any, be filed within two weeks thereafter.Liberty is given to the parties to mention the matter after exchanging affidavits.Parties are directed to act on the communication of the learned advocates.