Medical Negligence – It is too much to expect from a doctor to remain on the bed side of the patient throughout his stay in the hospital. It is a case where the patient was in serious condition impending gangrene even before admission to the Hospital but even after surgery and re-exploration, if the patient does not survive, the fault cannot be fastened on the doctors as a case of medical negligence. It is too much to expect from a doctor to remain on the bed side of the patient throughout his stay in the hospital which was being expected by the complainant here. A doctor is expected to provide reasonable care which is not proved to be lacking in any manner in the present case. [Para 26]The doctors are expected to take reasonable care but none of the professionals can assure that the patient would overcome the surgical procedures.It may be mentioned here that the complainant had led no evidence 31 of experts to prove the alleged medical negligence except their own affidavits. The experts could have proved if any of the doctors in the Hospital providing treatment to the patient were deficient or negligent in service. A perusal of the medical record produced does not show any omission in the manner of treatment. The experts of different specialities and super-specialities of medicine were available to treat and guide the course of treatment of the patient. [Para 35]Every death of a patient cannot on the face of it be considered to be medical negligence.Hospital and the doctors are required to exercise sufficient care in treating the patient in all circumstances. However, in an unfortunate case, death may occur. It is necessary that sufficient material or medical evidence should be available before the adjudicating authority to arrive at the conclusion that death is due to medical negligence.Res Ipsa Loquitur is a Latin phrase that means the thing speaks for itself. The doctor cannot be held liable for medical negligence by applying the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur for the reason that a patient has not favourably responded to a treatment given by a doctor or a surgery has failed. There is a tendency to blame the doctor when a patient dies or suffers some mishap. This is an intolerant conduct of the family members to not accept the death in such cases. The increased cases of manhandling of medical professionals who worked day and night without their comfort has been very well seen in this pandemic.The Commission opined that considering the conditions in India, it is very difficult to secure the presence of an expert doctor to file an affidavit against another expert doctor and thus it would be a case of res ipsa loquitor. It is to be noted that res ipsa loquitor is a rule of evidence. The sole basis of finding the appellants negligent was res ipsa loquitor which would not be applicable herein keeping in view the treatment record produced by the Hospital and/or the Doctor.The patient was in a critical condition and if he could not survive even after surgery, the blame cannot be passed on to the Hospital and the Doctor who provided all possible treatment within their means and capacity.There was never a stage when the patient was left unattended. The DSA test was conducted by the Hospital itself on 22.4.1998. However, since it became dysfunctional on 24.4.1998 and considering the critical condition of the patient, an alternative angiography test was advised and conducted and the re-exploration was thus planned.If the operation theatres were occupied at the time when the operation of the patient was contemplated, it cannot be said that there is a negligence on the part of the Hospital.It is only a matter of chance that all the four operation theatres of the Hospital were occupied when the patient was to undergo surgery. We do not find that the expectation of the patient to have an emergency operation theatre is reasonable as the hospital can provide only as many operation theatres as the patient load warrants. A team of specialist doctors was available and also have attended to the patient but unfortunately nature had the last word and the patient breathed his last. The family may not have coped with the loss of their loved one, but the Hospital and the Doctor cannot be blamed as they provided the requisite care at all given times. No doctor can assure life to his patient but can only attempt to treat his patient to the best of his ability which was being done in the present case as well. [Para 36]Simple lack of care, an error of judgment or an accident, is not a proof of negligence on the part of a medical professional.The grievance of the complainant :(a) The Doctor had not examined the patient after surgery;(b) The patient was made to stand in queue for DSA test despite his critical condition whereafter the machine was found to be dysfunctional;(c) Angiography was performed after 8 hours of discovering that blood supply has stopped;(d) The Hospital delayed treatment by 12 hours as no operation theatre was available;(e) The Doctor did not attend the patient and left him in the care of inexperienced doctors;(f) Doctor failed to amputate legs on time on account of gangrene and did not try to treat the gangrene; and(g) The reliance on the principle of res ipsa loquitor to support the finding that it is a case of medical negligence.The findings recorded by the Commission holding the Hospital and the Doctor guilty of medical negligence are not sustainable in law. Consequently, the present appeals are allowed. The order passed by the Commission is set aside and the complaint is dismissed. Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hemant Gupta pronounced the reportable Judgment of the Bench comprising His Lordship and Hon’ble Mr. Justice V. Ramasubramanian.Counsel for the parties Ms. Bina Madhavan, Adv. Ms. Rao Vishwaja, Adv. for M/S. Lawyer S Knit & Co, AOR Ms. Nandini Gore, Adv. Mr. Karanveer Singh Anand, Adv. Ms. Pracheta Kar, Adv. Mr. Aditya Sidhra, Adv. Mr. Nadeem Afroz, Adv. for M/s. Karanjawala & Co. Mr. Anil Kumar, Adv. Mr. Kamal Mohan Gupta, AOR Mr. Ashwani Kumar, AOR