Call Details – the licence issued to service provider will not permit them to furnish call details – In such circumstances, High Court can’t issue any direction to service provider to furnish the call details.Petitioner by Advs. Zubair Pulikkool K. Seena; Respondents by Advs. Santhosh Mathew. Jaishankar V. Nair, CGC Arun Thomas, Jennis Stephen, Vijay V. Paul, Veena Raveendran, Anil Sebastian Pulickel, R1 & R2 Divya Sara George, Jaisy Elza Joe, Abi Benny Areeckal, Leah Rachel Ninan.The above writ petition is filed with following prayers:“i) To issue writ of mandamus or such other writ or direction to the 3rd respondent to direct the 1st and 2nd respondents to issue incoming and outgoing calls details of the petitioner’s mobile number 7510757957 for the period from 05/08/2020 to 25/08/2020 including date, time and duration of the call time.ii) To grant such other reliefs as this Hon’ble Court deems fit and proper in the circumstances of the case.” 2. The petitioner is working as Sub Inspector of Police. While the petitioner was working at Coastal Police Station, Thalassery, in connection with an injury sustained to the petitioner, he was under treatment. It is the case of the petitioner that, on 19.08.2020 his immediate superior officer informed him to go for duty which he refused because of his ailments. It is the case of the petitioner that the said telephonic conversation led unhappy situation. It is the further case of the petitioner that, based on the complaint of the said superior officer, a disciplinary proceedings is initiated against the petitioner. The recorded mobile audio clip of the petitioner has been produced as evidence against the petitioner. According to the petitioner, it is an edited version. Since the duration of the call is not tallying with the produced clip, the petitioner applied for the call records from the respondent company to substantiate his contention in the disciplinary proceedings. The respondent company refused to supply the details. Hence, this writ petition is filed.3. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned counsel for respondents 1 and 2.4. The contention of the petitioner is that he wants to get the incoming and out going call record details of the petitioner’s mobile phone for the period from 05.08.2020 to 25.08.2020. The respondents filed a counter affidavit in which it is specifically stated that there are some legal embargo in furnishing such details to the petitioner. It will be better to extract paragraph No.7 of the counter affidavit filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2.5. According to 1st and 2nd respondents, the licence issued to them will not permit them to furnish these details. In such circumstances, this Court is not in a position to issue any direction to 1st and 2nd respondents to furnish the call details to the petitioner.6. The grievance of the petitioner is that, in the disciplinary proceedings, an edited version of the telephonic conversation is produced. The petitioner is free to approach the disciplinary authority and submit that it is an edited version and substantiate the same by adducing appropriate evidence and by filing petitions before the disciplinary authorities for appropriate relief. In such situation, this Court need not issue any direction to 1st and 2nd respondents to furnish the call details.With liberty to the petitioner to approach the disciplinary authority with proper prayer, this writ petition is closed.