Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – Section 125 (3) – the claimant would be entitled to file a consolidated application for recovery of previous 12 months dues. The consolidated application shall be treated as 12 individual claims for recovery of monthly allowances of previous 12 months.That the Court will deal with the application in 12 separate compartments and shall issue separate warrants of recovery of every month’s dues, subject to the condition that the application shall not be entertained for maintenance dues beyond a period of 12 months. In the event of non-payment/non-recovery of the maintenance, the Court may pass separate sentences upon the defaulter extending to one month’s imprisonment for each default. In cases where, no order of interim maintenance has been passed and the Court, while finally deciding the application for maintenance, orders that the maintenance shall be payable from the date of filing of the application, the claimant may file an application for recovery of the accrued amount and such application shall be considered to be within time if filed within 12 months from the date of the order.Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – the Government should consider suitable amendments in Section 125 Cr.P.C. so that the procedure of recovery can be simplified.Considering the plain language of Section 125(3) Cr.P.C., manifestly, an application for recoveries cannot be made for a period of more than one year’s arrears. However, we are of the considered view that language of this Section is very restrictive and complicates the procedure of recovery of maintenance putting the destitute claimants to face unnecessary hurdles and undergo a cumbersome procedure of filing fresh applications, getting the notices thereof served upon the defaulter and thereby delaying the process of recovery.Members of the Bar : Mr.Ashok Chhangani. Mr.B.S.Sndhu through VC Dr.R.D.S.S. Kharlia through VC Mr.Gajendra Singh Ms.Durga Kanwar Rathore. Mr.Amit K. Purohit, through VC Mr.Harshit Bhurani. Mr.Harshad Bhadu. Mr.Vivek Mathur through VC Mr.Arpit Gupta through VC. Mr.Anil Joshi, GA-cum-AAG (Incharge).SANDEEP MEHTA, J.1. The learned Sessions Judge, Pali has forwarded a reference to this Court under Section 395 Cr.P.C. for answering the following legal questions:“(1) WHETHER the Magistrate is precluded to pass a sentence, in an application under section 125(3) Cr.P.C., beyond a period of one month in pursuance of Execution Warrant on a consolidated application made within one year from the date on which the amount became due ?(2) WHETHER the order passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Shahada Khatoon (supra) operates as binding precedent or it qualifies as a mere observation in light of the arguments advanced by the appellant in that case ?(3) WHETHER clarification of the Hon’ble Supreme Court’s Order in the case of Shahada Khatoon (supra) by Full Bench of the Kerala High Court in the case of Santosh V State and by the Hon’ble Bombay High Court in Gorakshnath’s case (supra) are required to be read in light of the arguments advanced in the said case ?”2. The matter was registered as D.B. Criminal Reference No.2/2020. This Court, vide order dated 06.01.2021, directed that a notice of the reference be published in the cause list so as to notify the members of the Bar interested to advance submissions on the questions referred to this Court.In pursuance to the said notice, Sarva Shri Ashok Chhangani, B.S. Sandhu, Dr. RDSS Kharlia, Harshit Bhurani, Harshad Bhadu, Gajendra Singh Rathore, Amit Kumar Purohit, Vivek Mathur, Arpit Gupta and Ms. Durga Kanwar Rathore have appeared to assist the Court on the questions posed/raised by the Referral Court for being answered by virtue of Section 395 Cr.P.C.The issues involved in the reference revolve around interpretation of Section 125 (3) Cr.P.C. which reads as below:-“Section 125(3):- If any person so ordered fails without sufficient cause to comply with the order, any such Magistrate may, for every breach of the order, issue a warrant for levying the amount due in the manner provided for levying fines, and may sentence such person, for the whole, or any part of each month’s allowances for the maintenance or the interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be, remaining unpaid after the execution of the warrant, to imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or until payment if sooner made:Provided that no warrant shall be issued for the recovery of any amount due under this section unless application be made to the Court to levy such amount within a period of one year from the date on which it became due:Provided further that if such person offers to maintain his wife on condition of her living with him, and she refuses to live with him, such Magistrate may consider any grounds of refusal stated by her, and may make an order under this section notwithstanding such offer, if he is satisfied that there is just ground for so doing.Explanation.- If a husband has contracted marriage with another woman or keeps a mistress, it shall be considered to be just ground for his wife’s refusal to live with him.”3. As the crux of the controversy revolves around the Supreme Court Judgment in the case of Shahada Khatoon & Ors. vs. Amjad Ali & Ors. reported in 1999 Crl.L.J. 5060, it would be fruitful to reproduce the said Judgment for the sake of ready reference:4. Sarva Shri Ashok Chhangani, B.S. Sandhu, Dr. RDSS Kharlia, Harshit Bhurani, Harshad Bhadu and Ms. Durga Kanwar Rathore argued in favour of the proposition that the powers conferred upon the Court by Section 125(3) Cr.P.C. cannot be circumscribed/ curtailed by the Supreme Court decision in the case of Shahada Khatoon (supra) and the ratio of the said Judgment has to be considered in context of the peculiar facts which were under consideration before Hon’ble the Supreme Court. They urged that maintenance under Section 125 Cr.P.C. is meant to provide monthly sustenance to the destitute wife, children and parents. Breach of the monthly maintenance order would constitute a separate cause of action for every default and hence, the Court undoubtedly has the power to award to the defaulter, separate imprisonment which may extend to one month or until the payment if sooner made. They contended that the person, in whose favour the order of maintenance is passed (hereinafter referred to as ‘the claimant’), has the right to seek enforcement thereof within one year and in such a case, if a composite application is filed by the claimant for recovery of accruing maintenance for a period of 12 months, the Court would be empowered to award separate sentences of upto one month for each breach. They also urged that the Section 125 Cr.P.C. is meant for providing a bare minimum financial support/ stability to the destitute and as such, it needs to be interpreted in a purposive manner. They submitted that even in the case of Shahada Khatoon (supra), Hon’ble the Supreme Court has observed that for every breach/ non-compliance of the order of Magistrate, the wife can approach the Magistrate again for the similar relief and thus, in case of repeated breaches running upto 12 months, it would be absolutely justified for the Court to entertain a composite application and to award separate sentences of one month for each default and in that manner, a balanced approach can be struck. In support of their contentions, they placed reliance on the following Judgments:5. Per contra, learned counsel Sarva Shri Gajendra Singh Rathore, Arpit Gupta, Vivek Mathur and Amit Kumar Purohit, vehemently and fervently opposed the above proposition and urged that the view taken by Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the case of Shahada Khatoon (supra) is a binding precedent and the Court would not be empowered to pass a sentence exceeding one month even if the breach of the maintenance order is repeated over a period of time.6. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions advanced at Bar, carefully considered the questions framed for answer in this reference and have perused the Judgments cited at Bar.7. Firstly, we consider the plain language of Section 125(3) Cr.P.C. which provides that “if a person ordered to pay maintenance, fails without sufficient cause to comply with the order, the Magistrate may, for every breach of the order, issue a warrant for levying the amount due in the manner provided for levying fines and may sentence such person for the whole or any part of each month’s allowance for the maintenance….., to imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or until payment if sooner made.” Splitting the provision for better understanding, it becomes clear that it operates in four parts:(i) Non-compliance of the order of maintenance by the person directed to pay monthly maintenance,(ii) Every breach of the order,(iii) Issuance of warrant for levying the amount due in the manner provided for levying fines and(iv) Sentencing such person for the whole or any part of each month’s allowance, imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month.Meaning thereby, if the person ordered to make payment of maintenance fails to do so, the Magistrate shall be empowered to issue warrant for recovery of the maintenance due in the manner provided for levying fines and may also sentence such person for the whole or any part of each month’s allowance to imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month. Clearly thus, every single breach of the monthly maintenance order gives rise to a distinct cause of action calling for issuance of a warrant for levying of the amount and a discretion is given to the Magistrate that in the event of non-payment, the person ordered may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month for each month’s default. The clear intention of the legislature is that as the order of maintenance is stipulated to provide maintenance on a monthly basis, every breach thereof is an infringement for which a separate warrant for levying fine is to be issued and in addition thereto, the person so ordered can be sentenced to imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month concurring with every breach. The application for recovery of the maintenance amount can be filed within a period of 12 months from the date it becomes due. The section does not provide that the claimant must file separate applications for recovery of each month’s allowance.8. We have given our respectful consideration to the judgments cited by learned counsel Sarva Shri Gajendra Singh Rathore, Arpit Gupta, Vivek Mathur and Amit Kumar Purohit who have argued against the preposition and find that in all of these cases, the view which was taken by the Court was that only a sentence of one month’s imprisonment can be passed for the default arising from non-payment of every month’s maintenance. The said view is otherwise also in accordance with the specific language of Section 125(3) Cr.P.C. However, in none of these judgments, has it been stipulated that the Magistrate/Court cannot entertain a consolidated application for multiple defaults or that separate sentences of imprisonment cannot be passed on the basis of a single application for recovery of multiple monthly installments of maintenance.9. In the case of Shantha @ Ushadevi & Ors. vs. B.G. Shivananjappa, reported in AIR 2005 SC 2410, Hon’ble the Supreme Court approved the concept of continuing application for recovery observing:Thus, it is clear that the application for recovery of maintenance once filed by the claimant, would definitely remain alive and pending for maintenance of 12 months.The contention of the learned counsel, who have argued against the proposition, is absolutely untenable because even in Shahada Khatoon (supra) all that has been laid down is that the Magistrate has no power to impose sentence beyond one month for one default. However, in cases of multiple defaults, it has been clearly stipulated that for the next default, the wife can approach the Magistrate again for similar relief. However, the said Judgment does not set out any straight jacket formula that the wife cannot file a consolidated application for default of 12 months which, in our view, is permissible as per the proviso to Section 125 (3) Cr.P.C. and the Judgment in the case of Shahada Khatoon (supra).Therefore, we have no hesitation in holding that where the defaulter repeatedly breaches the order of maintenance under Section 125 Cr.P.C., the Court would be acting well within its jurisdiction by issuing separate warrants for recovery of each month’s dues and sentence the defaulter to separate terms of imprisonment of upto one month each for every month’s default. The only restriction would be that the recovery application shall not be entertained for dues beyond previous 12 months.10. We are in total conformity with the view taken by Hon’ble the Larger Bench of the Gujarat High Court in the case of Suo Motu vs. State of Gujarat reported in 2009 Cri.L.J. 920 wherein, it was held as below:-11. We now proceed to deal with the ancillary question i.e., “Whether the Magistrate is precluded from passing multiple sentences by entertaining a consolidated application for recovery of dues beyond one month.”The proviso to Section 125(3) Cr.P.C. reads that “no warrant shall be issued for the recovery of any amount due under this Section unless the application be made to the Court to levy such amount within a period of one year from the date on which it became due. Thus, the proviso stipulates that an application has to be filed to the Court to levy the amount due and that such application should be made within a period of one year from the date on which the amount becomes due. The legislature has made it clear that even though the maintenance, which is awarded under Section 125 Cr.P.C., is recurring every month, an option has been given to the claimant to file an application for the recovery of the amount within a period of one year from the date on which it becomes due. There is no requirement in law that a separate application should be filed for every month’s maintenance. Thus, there is no doubt in the mind of this Court that the claimant/claimants can file a consolidated application for levying the amount due for the period of preceding 12 months and there is no impediment there against. A consolidated application would rather facilitate the procedural wrangles for the claimant and also, ease the burden on the Courts. Dealing with separate applications for each month’s default/dues would unnecessarily complicate the issues because it would require repetition of the entire procedure right from the issuance of recovery warrants against the defaulter for each month’s allowance and to wait for service thereof. Without any doubt, for defaults of 12 previous months, the Court may simultaneously issue separate warrants for levying every month’s due amount and if, despite service, the defaulter fails to make the payment, then separate sentences of imprisonment upto one month may be passed for every month’s default. Needless to say, the sentences would have to be passed by maintaining the sequence in the descending order of defaults limited upto previous 12 months.12. We therefore answer the reference in the following manner:-(I) That the claimant/claimants would be entitled to file a consolidated application for recovery of previous 12 months dues. The consolidated application shall be treated as 12 individual claims for recovery of monthly allowances of previous 12 months.(II) That the Court will deal with the application in 12 separate compartments and shall issue separate warrants of recovery of every month’s dues, subject to the condition that the application shall not be entertained for maintenance dues beyond a period of 12 months. In the event of non-payment/non-recovery of the maintenance, the Court may pass separate sentences upon the defaulter extending to one month’s imprisonment for each default;(III) We also clarify that in cases where, no order of interim maintenance has been passed and the Court, while finally deciding the application for maintenance, orders that the maintenance shall be payable from the date of filing of the application, the claimant may file an application for recovery of the accrued amount and such application shall be considered to be within time if filed within 12 months from the date of the order.12. Before concluding the matter, we would like to observe that considering the plain language of Section 125(3) Cr.P.C., manifestly, an application for recoveries cannot be made for a period of more than one year’s arrears. However, we are of the considered view that language of this Section is very restrictive and complicates the procedure of recovery of maintenance putting the destitute claimants to face unnecessary hurdles and undergo a cumbersome procedure of filing fresh applications, getting the notices thereof served upon the defaulter and thereby delaying the process of recovery.We therefore strongly feel that the appropriate Government should consider suitable amendments in Section 125 Cr.P.C. so that the procedure of recovery can be simplified.In the meantime, as an interim measure and in order to simplify the procedure and to avoid unnecessary delays, we hereby direct all the Magistrates/ Family Courts across the State of Rajasthan seized of the applications under Section 125 Cr.P.C., that after passing of the order, the Court shall facilitate the claimant to move an application for recovery of maintenance amount on the same day when the application is decided. The notice of the application shall be served on the defaulter on the date of the decision and consequently, he/she shall be under an obligation to deposit the maintenance amount by the particular date to be stipulated failing which, the Court may initiate the procedure of recovery in terms of Section 125(3) Cr.P.C.The reference is answered accordingly.