Habeas Corpus – Custody of Child – the paramount consideration would be welfare of the minor and not the competing rights with regard to guardianship agitated by the parties for which the proper remedy would be before the appropriate statutory forum.Counsel for Petitioner :- Rajeev Sawhney,Rajiv Lochan Shukla,Ramanuj Yadav,Virendra Kumar Yadav; Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.,Abhinav Gaur,Ankur Verma,Manoj Kumar Rajvanshi,Prakash Chandra Yadav.Hon’ble Dr. Yogendra Kumar Srivastava, J.1. Heard Sri M.D.Mishra along with Sri Ramanuj Yadav, learned counsel for the petitioners, Sri Vinod Kant, learned Additional Advocate General, appearing along with Ms. Sushma Soni, learned Additional Government Advocate for the State respondents and Sri Anoop Trivedi, learned Senior Counsel assisted by Sri Ankur Verma, learned counsel for respondent no. 4.2. The present habeas corpus petition was initially filed by the paternal grand-parents, arrayed as petitioner nos. 2 and 3, seeking custody of the petitioner no. 1, corpus, a minor child stated to be of age about 19 months at that point of time, who was said to be with the respondent no. 4, her maternal grand-father.3. The pleadings in the petition are indicative of the fact that the petitioner no.1, corpus, was born on 04.06.2018 from the wedlock of the son of the petitioner nos. 3 and 4 and the daughter of respondent no. 4. It is stated that the mother of the petitioner no. 1 was seriously ill, thereafter she along with the petitioner no. 1 went away along with the respondent no. 4 for medical treatment and subsequently she died on 31.07.2019 due to acute cardiac respiratory arrest and after her death the petitioner no. 1 is in the custody of respondent no. 4. It is contended that despite requests, the respondent no. 4 is not handing over the custody of the petitioner no. 1 to the petitioner nos. 2 and 3 and that the same amounts to illegal detention.4. A counter affidavit has been filed on behalf of the respondent no. 4 wherein it is pointed out that the respondent no. 4 was forced into bringing his daughter back due to continuous torture and cruelty inflicted upon her by the in-laws, which resulted in her death, and the newly born girl child, the petitioner no. 1, is under the care of the respondent no. 4 since the death of her mother. It is stated that the respondent no. 4, who is the maternal grand-father of the petitioner no. 1, is providing good care to her and it cannot be said that she is under any kind of illegal custody. It is, at this stage, as reflected from the order-sheet, that an application seeking impleadment of the father of the petitioner no. 1 (corpus) was moved, which was allowed on 14.02.2020 and he was permitted to be impleaded as a petitioner in the case.5. A supplementary counter affidavit was filed on behalf of the respondent no. 4 containing assertions with regard to the harassment of the daughter of respondent no. 4 for dowry and torture and cruelty inflicted upon her which ultimately resulted in her death. Particulars of a criminal complaint and an FIR dated 12.2.2020, lodged under Sections 498-A, 304-B IPC and Section 3/4 Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 in which the petitioner nos. 2, 3 and 4 (i.e. father and the paternal grand parents of the corpus), are named as accused, have also been mentioned.6. A rejoinder affidavit and a supplementary rejoinder affidavits have been filed on behalf of the petitioners disputing the assertions made in the counter affidavit and the supplementary counter affidavit, respectively, and reiterating the claim with regard to custody and guardianship of the petitioner no. 1, corpus.7. Learned counsel for the petitioners has sought to contend that the petitioner no. 1 being a minor child, in the absence of her mother, the petitioner no. 2, her father, who is the only surviving parent, would be her natural guardian, as per Section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 (HMGA) and accordingly the respondent no. 4 is not entitled to retain her custody and that the same is illegal. In support of his submissions, reliance has been placed upon the decisions in Tejaswini Gaud Vs. Shekhar Jagdish Prasad Tewari and others, (2019) 7 SCC 42 and Kumari Palak (Minor) and another Vs. Raj Kumar Vishwakarma and others, Habeas Corpus Writ Petition No. 61687 of 2016, decided on 12.04.2017.8. Controverting the aforesaid assertions, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondent no. 4 has submitted that the admitted facts of the case are that the petitioner no. 1 is a minor girl child of age about three years and that she is under the care and custody of respondent no. 4, her maternal grand-father, ever since she was an infant of less than two years of age when the mother was tortured for dowry and forced to go to her parental home along with the minor child.9. It is further submitted that subsequent to the death of her mother on account of the torture and cruelty inflicted upon her, the minor child is under the care and custody of respondent no. 4 which can in no manner be held to be illegal. Pointing out to the fact that the petitioner nos. 2, 3 and 4 are named accused in the FIR relating to offence of dowry death inflicted upon the mother of the corpus and are facing criminal trial, it is submitted that it would be totally against the interest of the minor child to grant her custody to the said petitioners. To support his submissions, reliance is placed upon the decisions in Neelam Vs. Man Singh, 2014 SCC OnLine P&H 25034; Smt. Anjali Kapoor Vs. Rajiv Baijal, (2009) 7 SCC 322; Athar Husain Vs. Syed Siraj Ahmed and others, (2010) 2 SCC 654; Shayamrao Maroti Korwate Vs. Deepak Kisanrao Tekram, (2010) 10 SCC 314; Nil Ratan Kundu and another Vs. Abhijit Kundu, (2008) 9 SCC 413; Syed Saleemuddin Vs. Dr. Rukhsana and others, (2001) 5 SCC 247; Kirtikumar Maheshankar Joshi Vs. Pradip Kumar Karunashankar Joshi, (1992) 3 SCC 573; Vaibhavi Sharma (Minor) and another Vs. State of U.P. and others, 2020 (12) ADJ 654 and Vahin Saxena (Minor Corpus) and another Vs. State of U.P. and others, 2021 SCC OnLine All 593.10. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.11. In a petition seeking a writ of habeas corpus in a matter relating to a claim for custody of a child, the principal issue which is to be taken into consideration is as to whether from the facts of the case, it can be stated that the custody of the child is illegal.12. The writ of habeas corpus is a prerogative writ and an extraordinary remedy. It is a writ of right and not a writ of course and may be granted only on reasonable ground or probable cause being shown, as held in Mohammad Ikram Hussain vs. State of U.P. and others, AIR 1964 SC 1625 and Kanu Sanyal vs. District Magistrate Darjeeling, (1973) 2 SCC 674. The observations made in the Constitution Bench decision in the case of Kanu Sanyal (supra) with regard to the nature and scope of a writ of habeas corpus are being extracted below.13. The exercise of the extraordinary jurisdiction for issuance of a writ of habeas corpus would, therefore, be seen to be dependent on the jurisdictional fact where the applicant establishes a prima facie case that the detention is unlawful. It is only where the aforementioned jurisdictional fact is established that the applicant becomes entitled to the writ as of right.14. The object and scope of a writ of habeas corpus in the context of a claim relating to custody of a minor child fell for consideration in Nithya Anand Raghvan Vs. State (NCT of Delhi) and another, (2017) 8 SCC 454 and it was held that the principal duty of the court in such matters is to ascertain whether the custody of the child is unlawful and illegal and whether the welfare of the child requires that his present custody should be changed and the child be handed over to the care and custody of any other person.15. Taking a similar view in the case of Syed Saleemuddin vs. Dr. Rukhsana and others, (2001) 5 SCC 247 it was held that in a habeas corpus petition seeking transfer of custody of a child from one parent to the other, the principal consideration for the court would be to ascertain whether the custody of the child can be said to be unlawful or illegal and whether the welfare of the child requires that the present custody should be changed. It was stated thus:-16. The question of maintainability of a habeas corpus petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for custody of a minor was examined in Tejaswini Gaud and others vs. Shekhar Jagdish Prasad Tewari and others, (2019) 7 SCC 42 and it was held that the petition would be maintainable where detention by parents or others is found to be illegal and without any authority of law and the extraordinary remedy of a prerogative writ of habeas corpus can be availed in exceptional cases where ordinary remedy provided by the law is either unavailable or ineffective. The observations made in the judgment in this regard are as follows:-17. In the case of Smt. Anjali Kapoor Vs. Rajiv Baijal, (2009) 7 SCC 322 where the custody of a minor child was being claimed by the father being natural parent from the maternal grand-mother, the mother having died in child birth, it was held that taking proper care and attention in upbringing of the child is an important factor for granting custody of child and on facts, the child having been brought up by the grand-mother since her infancy and having developed emotional bonding, the custody of the child was allowed to be retained by the maternal grand-mother. While considering the competing rights of natural guardianships vis-a-vis welfare of the child, the test for consideration by the Court was held to be; what would best serve the welfare and interest of the child. Referring to the earlier decisions in Sumedha Nagpal Vs. State of Delhi, (2000) 9 SCC 745; Rosy Jacob Vs. Jacob A.Chakramakkal, (1973) 1 SCC 840; Elizabeth Dinshaw Vs. Arvand M. Dinshaw, (1987) 1 SCC 42 and Muthuswami Chettiar Vs. K.M.Chinna Muthuswami Moopanar, AIR 1935 Mad 195 it was also held that welfare of child prevails over legal rights of parties while deciding custody of minor child. The observations made in the judgment in this regard are as follows:-18. In Anjali Kapoor (supra), it was held that ordinarily, under the Guardian and Wards Act, 1890 (GWA), the natural guardians of the child have the right to the custody of the child, but that right is not absolute and the courts are expected to give paramount consideration to the welfare of the minor child.19. The question as to how the court would determine what is the benefit of the child was considered in Re: McGrath (infants), [1893] 1 Ch. 143 C.A. and it was observed by Lindley L.J., as follows :-20. The issue as to welfare of the child again arose in Re O. (an infant), [1965] 1 Ch. 23 C.A. where Harman L.J., stated as follows :-21. The question as to what would be the dominating factors while examining the welfare of a child was considered in Walker Vs. Walker & Harrison, 1981 New Ze Recent Law 257 and it was observed that while material considerations have their place, they are secondary matters. More important are stability and security, loving and understanding care and guidance, and warm and compassionate relationships which are essential for the development of the child’s character, personality and talents. It was stated as follows :-22. In the context of consideration of an application by a parent seeking custody of a child through the medium of a habeas corpus proceeding, it has been stated in American Jurisprudence, 2nd Edn. Vol. 39 as follows :-23. The question of a claim raised by maternal grand-father for guardianship of a minor child whose mother had died after giving birth to the child was subject matter of consideration in Shyamrao Maroti Karwate Vs. Deepak Kisanrao Tekham, (2010) 10 SCC 314 and reiterating that in the matter of custody of a minor child, paramount consideration is welfare of minor and not rights of parents or relatives, it was held that the appointment of the maternal grand-father as guardian, was justified. Referring to the judgments in Gaurav Nagpal Vs. Sumedha Nagpal, (2009) 1 SCC 42 and Anjali Kapoor Vs. Rajiv Baijal, (2009) 7 SCC 322 it was stated as follows :-24. It may be apposite, at this stage, to refer to the law relating to guardians and wards, which is governed in terms of the Guardian and Wards Act, 1890 (GWA) and an order with regard to guardianship upon an application filed by a person claiming entitlement may be passed under the aforesaid enactment.25. The GWA consolidates and amends the law relating to guardians and wards. Section 4 of the Act defines “minor” as “a person who has not attained the age of majority”. “Guardian” means “a person having the care of the person of a minor or his property, or of both his person and property”. “Ward” is defined as “a minor for whose person or property, or both, there is a guardian”. Sections 5 to 19 of the Act relate to appointment and declaration of guardians.26. Section 7 thereof deals with “power of the court to make order as to guardianship” which reads as under:27. Section 8 of the Guardian and Wards Act, 1890 enumerates persons entitled to apply for an order as to guardianship. Section 9 empowers the Court having jurisdiction to entertain application for guardianship. Sections 10 to 16 deal with procedure and powers of court.28. Section 17 is another material provision and may be reproduced hereunder:29. The Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 19561 was enacted to amend and codify certain parts of the law relating to minority and guardianship among Hindus. The Act is supplemental to the Guardians and Wards Act, and in terms of Section 2 thereof its provisions are in addition to and not in derogation to the Guardians and Wards Act.30. Section 4 of the HMGA defines “minor” as “a person who has not completed the age of eighteen years”. “Guardian” means “a person having the care of the person of a minor or of his property or of both his person and property”, and includes a “natural guardian”. “Natural guardian” means any of the guardians mentioned in Section 6 of the HMGA.31. Section 6 enacts as to who can be said to be a “natural guardian”. It reads thus:32. Section 8 thereof enumerates powers of a natural guardian and Section 13 deals with welfare of a minor, and the same read as under :-33. The provision with regard to making of an application regarding claims based on entitlement of guardianship is under the GWA and under Section 12 thereof the court is empowered to make interlocutory orders for protection of a minor including an order for temporary custody and protection of the person or property of the minor.34. The aforestated provisions make it clear that in a matter of custody of a minor child, the paramount consideration is the “welfare of the minor” and not rights of the parents or relatives under a statute which are in force. The word “welfare” used in Section 13 of the HMGA has to be construed liberally and must be taken in its widest sense.35. The subject matter relating to custody of children during the pendency of the proceedings under the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (HMA) is governed in terms of the provisions contained under Section 26 thereof. The aforesaid section applies to “any proceeding” under the HMA and it gives the power to the court to make provisions in regard to: (i) custody, (ii) maintenance, and (iii) education of minor children. For this purpose the court may make such provisions in the decree as it may deem just and proper and it may also pass interim orders during the pendency of the proceedings and all such orders even after passing of the decree.36. The provisions under Section 26 of the HMA were considered in Gaurav Nagpal v Sumedha Nagpal, (2009) 1 SCC 42 and it was held as follows:-37. While determining whether father or mother should get the custody of a minor child, in Thrity Hoshie Dolikuka Vs. Hoshiam Shavaksha Dolikuka, (1982) 2 SCC 544 it was held that the only consideration for the court in such matters should be the welfare and interest of the minor. It was stated thus :-38. Further, referring to para 428 of Halsbury’s Laws of England, 3rd Edn., Vol. 2129, in Thrity Hoshie Dolikuka’s case, it was observed as follows :-39. Examining the factors to be considered in matters relating to custody of a minor child, in Mausami Moitra Ganguli Vs. Jayant Ganguli, (2008) 7 SCC 673 it was held that better financial resources, love for child, or statutory rights are no doubt relevant but welfare of the child would be paramount. It was observed as follows :-40. The principles as to custody and upbringing of a minor as delineated in para 809 of Halsbury’s Laws of England 4th Edn., Vol. 1329, were also referred in Mausami Moitra Ganguli and it was stated thus:-41. The principles in relation to custody of a minor child again came up for consideration in Gaurav Nagpal Vs. Sumedha Nagpal, (2009) 1 SCC 42 and it was reiterated that the paramount consideration in such matters would be ‘welfare of the child’ and not rights of parents under a statute for the time being in force. The court would have to give due weightage to the child’s ordinary comfort, contentment, health, education, intellectual development, and favourable surroundings but over and above physical comfort, moral and ethical values would also have to be given importance. It was stated thus :-42. A similar view was taken in Gaytri Bajaj Vs. Jiten Bhalla, (2012) 12 SCC 471 and it was held that in a matter relating to child custody, the welfare, interest and desire of child has to be given paramount importance. It was observed as follows :-43. The question with regard to custody of a minor was again subject matter of consideration in Vivek Singh vs. Romani Singh, (2017) 3 SCC 231 and it was observed that welfare of the child would be the prime consideration and psycho-social as also physical development of child for shaping of an independent personality would be of foremost concern of court as parens patriae in deciding grant of custody of a child. It was observed as follows :-44. In somewhat similar set of facts, in the case of Nil Ratan Kundu and another vs. Abhijit Kundu, (2008) 9 SCC 413 where the custody of a minor was sought in the background of the pendency of a criminal case under Sections 498 and 304 I.P.C. against the father charging him of causing the death of a minor’s mother, it was held that the paramount consideration in such matters would be the welfare of the child, and the court, exercising ‘parens patriae‘ jurisdiction, must give due weightage to a child’s ordinary comfort, contentment, health, education, intellectual development and favourable surroundings as well as physical comfort and moral values and the character of the proposed guardian is also required to be considered. It was held that the pendency of a criminal case, wherein the father has been charged of causing the death of the minor’s mother, was a relevant factor required to be considered before an appropriate order could be passed.45. Referring to the legal position under the English Law, American Law and the Indian Law in Nil Ratan Kundu‘s case, it was observed as follows :-46. In the aforementioned decision of Nil Ratan Kundu (supra) the principles governing custody of minor children were stated as follows :-47. Considering the facts of the case in particular the allegations against the respondent and pendency of a criminal case for an offence punishable under Section 498-A IPC, it was observed in the decision in the case of Nil Ratan Kundu that one of the matters which is required to be considered by a court of law is ‘character’ of the proposed guardian and that the same would be a relevant factor. It was observed thus :-48. In an earlier decision in the case of Kirtikumar Maheshankar Joshi vs. Pradipkumar Karunashanker Joshi, (1992) 3 SCC 573 where in almost similar circumstances the father was facing a charge under Section 498-A I.P.C., it was held that though the father being a natural guardian, has a preferential right to the custody of the children, but in the facts and circumstances of the case, it would not be in the interest of the children to hand over their custody to the father.49. It is, therefore, seen that in an application seeking a writ of habeas corpus for custody of a minor child, as is the case herein, the principal consideration for the court would be to ascertain whether the custody of the child can be said to be unlawful and illegal and whether the welfare of the child requires that the present custody should be changed and the child should be handed over in the care and custody of somebody else other than in whose custody the child presently is.50. Proceedings in the nature of habeas corpus may not be used to examine the question of the custody of a child. The prerogative writ of habeas corpus, is in the nature of extraordinary remedy, and the writ is issued, where in the circumstances of a particular case, the ordinary remedy provided under law is either not available or is ineffective. The power of the High Court, in granting a writ, in child custody matters, may be invoked only in cases where the detention of a minor is by a person who is not entitled to his/her legal custody.51. A writ of habeas corpus, is employed in certain cases, to enable a party to enforce a ‘right to control’ – arising out of a domestic relationship, especially to enable a parent to get custody and control of a child, alleged to be detained by some other person. The Courts, however, do not go further in these cases than to enquire what is in the best interest of the child, and unless it appears to be for the interest of the child, an order remanding him to custody may not be granted. A claim for guardianship or custody, in a writ of habeas corpus, may not be held to be an absolute right, and would yield to what would appear to be in the interest of the child. In such cases it is not a question of liberty but of nurture and care.52. While examining the competing rights with regard to guardianship vis-a-vis welfare of the child, the predominant test for consideration would be – what would best serve the welfare and interest of the child. The interest of the child would prevail over legal rights of the parties while deciding matters relating to custody. The court, exercising parens patriae jurisdiction, would be required to give due weightage to factors such as child’s comfort, contentment, health, education, intellectual development and favourable surroundings as well as physical comfort and moral values – paramount consideration being the welfare of the child.53. The welfare of a child in the context of claims relating to custody/guardianship, would have to be considered in its widest amplitude. It may include material welfare – in the sense of adequacy of resources to provide a pleasant home and a comfortable standard of living. However, the material considerations, though having their place,would be secondary. More important would be the stability and security, loving and understanding care and guidance, and warm and compassionate relationships – which are essential for the psycho-social as also physical development of the child and for shaping of an independent personality.54. In a case where facts are disputed and a detailed inquiry is required, the court may decline to exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction and may direct the parties to approach the appropriate court. The aforementioned legal position has been considered in a recent judgement of this Court in Rachhit Pandey (Minor) And Another vs. State of U.P. and 3 others, 2021 (2) ADJ 320; Master Manan @ Arush Vs. State of U.P. and others, 2021 (5) ADJ 317 and Krishnakant Pandey (Corpus) and others Vs. State of U.P. and others, (2021) 2 AWC 1053 All.55. The judgment in the case of Tejaswini Gaud which is sought to be relied on  behalf of the petitioners, has already been considered in the preceding paragraphs and it has been noticed that while examining the question of maintainability of habeas corpus petition under Article 226 for custody of a minor, it was held that the petition would be maintainable where the detention by parents or others is found to be illegal and without any authority of law and that the said remedy can be availed in exceptional cases where ordinary remedy provided by the law is either unavailable or ineffective.56. The other judgment in the case of Kumari Palak (Minor) and another Vs. Raj Kumar Vishwakarma and others, Habeas Corpus Writ Petition No. 61687 of 2016, decided on 12.04.2017 upon which reliance has been placed on  behalf of the petitioners, is distinguishable on facts, inasmuch as it was a case where the father of the minor girl of age about three and half years, who had sought to claim her custody, had been acquitted in the criminal trial, and the Court upon taking into consideration the aforesaid facts and that the mother was no longer alive and that the father was ready to provide his daughter all love, care and affection, granted custody of the minor daughter to the father.57. The present habeas corpus petition principally seeks to raise claims with regard to guardianship and custody of the petitioner no. 1 (corpus) who is girl child stated to have been born on 04.06.2018 and presently aged about three years. It is not disputed that the mother of the petitioner no. 1, upon being seriously ill was taken away by the respondent no. 4 along with the minor child for medical treatment and she died on 31.07.2019 and since then the petitioner no. 1 is under the care and custody of the respondent no. 4, her maternal grand-father. The lodging of the FIR under Sections 498-A, 304-B IPC and Section 3/4 Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, in which the petitioner nos. 2, 3 and 4, are named as accused and the pendency of the criminal proceedings are reflected from the records.58. The aforementioned facts do not indicate that the custody of the minor with the respondent no. 4 can in any manner be said to amount to an illegal and improper detention. The child from her infancy, when she was of a tender age, appears to be living with her maternal grand-father. This together with the fact that the father who is claiming custody is named as an accused in a criminal case relating to the death of the mother of the corpus, would also be a relevant factor. The other considerations which would have a material bearing would be the necessity of the child being provided loving and understanding care, guidance and a warm and compassionate relationship in a pleasant home, which are essential for the development to the child’s character and personality.59. It would be relevant to bear in mind that in deciding questions relating to custody of a minor child, as in the present case, the paramount consideration would be welfare of the minor and not the competing rights with regard to guardianship agitated by the parties for which the proper remedy would be before the appropriate statutory forum.60. This Court, in the facts of the case, is not inclined to exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, to entertain the petition for a writ of habeas corpus.61. The petition stands dismissed accordingly.