Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – S. 366 – Evidence Act, 1872 – Ss. 8, 27 – Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 – S. 6 – Penal Code, 1860 – Ss. 363, 366, 376 (2) (i), 377, 201, 302 r/w. 376A – Whether the capital punishment in the present case is warranted or not ?In the present case, it is to be noted that the trial court had convicted the appellant and imposed death penalty on the very same day. The trial court as well as the High Court has only taken into consideration the crime but they have not taken into consideration the criminal, his state of mind, his socio­economic background, etc. In view of the settled legal position, it is our bounden duty to take into consideration the probability of the accused being reformed and rehabilitated. It is also our duty to take into consideration not only the crime but also the criminal, his state of mind and his socio­economic conditions. The appellant is a young person, who was 23 years old at the time of commission of the offence. He comes from a rural background. The State has not placed any evidence to show that there is no possibility with respect to reformation and the rehabilitation of the accused. The High Court as well as the trial court also has not taken into consideration this aspect of the matter.The appellant comes from a small village called Pusalda in Raigarh district of Chhattisgarh. His father was earning his livelihood as a barber. The appellant was studious and hardworking. He did really well at school and made consistent efforts to bring the family out of poverty. The conduct of the appellant in the prison has been found to be satisfactory. There are no criminal antecedents. It is the first offence committed by the appellant. No doubt, a heinous one. The 39 appellant is not a hardened criminal. It therefore cannot be said that there is no possibility of the appellant being reformed and rehabilitated foreclosing the alternative option of a lesser sentence and making imposition of death sentence imperative.The appeals are therefore partly allowed. The judgment and order of conviction for the offences punishable under Sections 363, 366, 376(2)(i), 377, 201, 302 read with Section 376A of the IPC and Section 6 of the POCSO Act is maintained. However, the death penalty imposed on the appellant under Section 302 IPC is commuted to life imprisonment. The sentences awarded for 41 the rest of the offences by the trial court as affirmed by the High Court, are maintained.Circumstantial Evidence – the false explanation cannot be taken to complete a missing link in the chain of circumstances, it can surely be taken to fortify the conclusion of conviction recorded on the basis of the proven incriminating circumstances – the non-explanation of the circumstances would fortify the finding, which is based on the chain of incriminating circumstances that leads to no other conclusion than the guilt of the accused. [Para 45]Evidence Act, 1872 – S. 8 – Motive, preparation and previous or subsequent conduct – the accused informed that if they perform a worship, the deceased could be found. Accordingly, a worship was performed and after performing the said worship, the accused said that the deceased could be found in a sack in the bushes near a pole beside the road. This circumstance could be an important circumstance for considering the conduct of the accused under Section 8 of the Evidence Act.Evidence Act, 1872 – S. 27 – Recovery of dead body of the victim on a memorandum of the accused – The said recovery has been attacked by the defence on the ground that the same is from an open place, accessible to one and all – What is relevant is not whether the place was accessible to others or not, but whether it was ordinarily visible to others. If the place at which the article hidden is such where only the person hiding it knows until he discloses that fact to any other person, then it will be immaterial whether the concealed place is accessible to others.The recovery of the dead body was made from a place, which cannot be said to be accessible to an ordinary person without prior knowledge since the body recovered was kept concealed in a gunny bag inside the shrubs situated at sufficient distance from the main road. The prosecution has proved beyond reasonable doubt that the recovery of the dead body of the deceased on the memorandum of the appellant under Section 27 of the Evidence Act, was from a place distinctly within the knowledge of the appellant. [Para 39]Law with regard to conviction in cases based on circumstantial evidence.for resting a conviction in the case of circumstantial evidence, the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn, should be fully established, and all the facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused. The circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and tendency, and they should be such as to exclude every hypothesis, but the one proposed to be proved. There must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for a conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused, and it must be such as to show 10 that within all human probabilities, the act must have been done by the accused.In a case of circumstantial evidence, before the case can be said to be fully established against an accused, it is necessary that the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn, should be fully established, and all the facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused. They should not be explainable on any other hypothesis except that the accused is guilty. The circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and tendency. They should exclude every hypothesis except the one to be proved. There must be a chain of evidence so 12 complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused and must show that in all human probabilities, the act must have been done by the accused.The prosecution has established the following circumstances beyond reasonable doubt:(i) The victim was reported missing and an FIR was lodged in this regard;(ii) The appellant had claimed that he could disclose the whereabouts of the victim by performing a worship;(iii) The said worship came to be conducted by the appellant in the early hours of 25th February 2016 in the presence of PWs 1, 2, 3 and 5 and the appellant disclosed to them that the dead body of the victim was inside a sack in the bushes near a pole beside the road in Amlibhauna;(iv) A suspicion arose in the minds of PWs 1, 2, 3 and 5 and they immediately informed the police. The said information is recorded in Rojnamcha No. 2 under Ex.­P.38;(v) Police immediately reached the spot and interrogated the appellant. On interrogation, a memorandum under Section 27 of the Evidence Act came to be recorded;(vi) On the basis of memorandum of the appellant under Section 27 of the Evidence Act, the dead body of the victim (Ex.­P.12) was recovered from a sack which was concealed by the appellant under the bushes from a place distinctly within his knowledge; and(vii) On a memorandum of the appellant under Section 27 of the Evidence Act, a black jeans half pant of the victim (Ex.­P.15) and a gamchha of the appellant (Ex.­P.16), were recovered from the dumping area behind D Block in Nagar Nigam Colony and the house of the appellant respectively.Hon’ble Mr.Justice B.R.Gavai pronounced the judgment of the Bench comprising Hon’ble Mr. Justice L.Nageswara Rao, His Lordship and Hon’ble Mrs.Justice B.V.Nagarathna.For Appellant(s) Mr. Anand Grover, Sr.Adv. Mr. Amartya Kanjilal,Adv. Ms. Priyashree Sharma, PH. Adv. Ms. Harini Raghupathy,Adv. Ms. Rushali Agarwal,Adv. Ms. Prerna Priyadarshini, AOR For Respondent(s) Mr. Nishanth Patil, AOR Ms. Shubhika Saluja, Adv. Ms. Malvika Kala, Adv.