Penal Code, 1860 – Ss. 299 & 300 – Culpable homicide / Murder – Once the prosecution establishes the existence of the three ingredients forming a part of “thirdly” in Section 300, it is irrelevant whether there was an intention on the part of the accused to cause death. It does not matter that there was no intention even to cause the injury of a kind that is sufficient to cause death in ordinary course of nature. Even the knowledge that an act of that kind is likely to cause death is not necessary to attract “thirdly”. Hence, it follows that clause “thirdly” of Section 300 will apply in this case. The High Court adopted an easy method of accepting the only contention canvassed that the offence made out was culpable homicide not amounting to murder. The High Court ignored that there were injuries on the vital parts of the body of the deceased. The High Court did not notice that all the elements of “thirdly” in Section 300 were established. The High Court has committed a gross error by applying Section 304 Part II of IPC, the Judgment and order of the High Court will have to be set aside and the judgment and order of the Sessions Court will have to be restored. The learned Additional District and Session Judge was right in convicting the accused for the offence punishable under Section 302/149 of IPC. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed by setting aside the impugned Judgment of the High Court [Paras 18, 19, 21 & 22] Penal Code, 1860 – Whether the third element of intention to inflict the particular bodily injuries was present ? Whether the case will be covered by “thirdly” in Section 300 ? Whether the offence of culpable homicide not amounting to murder is made out ?The factum of bodily injuries and its nature have been duly established. The cause of death as certified by the Board was excessive bleeding due to injuries on vital parts like right lung as well as liver and the resultant shock – deceased who was lying flat on the ground and at least three accused persons assaulted him. Therefore, it is impossible to say that the injuries on the chest which resulted into fracture of 5 ribs and rupture of right lung were accidental or un-intentional. The injuries on the vital parts like right lung and liver which resulted into bleeding and shock were sufficient to cause the death in the ordinary cause of nature. No one has a licence to run around inflicting injuries that are sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature and claim that they are not guilty of murder. If they inflict injuries of that kind, they must face the consequences; and they can only escape if it can be shown, or reasonably deduced that the injury was accidental or otherwise unintentional.Case Number : CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1519 OF 2021 (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No.9185 of 2016) (Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 18-07-2016 in DBCRL No. 886/2011 passed by the High Court Of Judicature For Rajasthan At Jodhpur); November 30, 2021Hon’ble Mr. Justice Abhay S.Oka pronounced the judgment of the Bench comprising Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ajay Rastogi and His Lordship.For Petitioner(s) Mr. Manish K. Bishnoi, AOR Ms. Pallavii Singh, Adv. For Respondent(s) Mr. Gp. Capt. Karan Singh Bhati, AOR Ms. Chitrangda Rastravara, Adv Mr. Manvendra Singh Rathore, Adv Mr. Dashrath Singh Rathore, Adv Mr. Aditya Chauhan, Adv Dr. Manish Singhvi, Sr. Adv Mr. Arpit Parkash, Adv Mr. Milind Kumar, AOR