Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 – In the absence of any psychotropic substance found in the conscious possession, mere reliance on the statement made by other accused under Section 67 of the NDPS Act is too tenuous a ground to sustain the order dismissing the bail application.Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 – Bail – Herbs / medicines meant to enhance male potency do not attract the provisions of the NDPS Act.Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 – Bail – Reliance on printouts of Whatsapp messages downloaded from the mobile phone and devices seized cannot be treated at the preliminary stage as sufficient material to establish a live link between the accused, when even as per the prosecution, scientific reports in respect of the said devices is still awaited.Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 – Bail – In the absence of any clarity so far on the quantitative analysis of the samples, the prosecution cannot be heard to state at this preliminary stage that the petitioners have been found to be in possession of commercial quantity of psychotropic subtances as contemplated under the NDPS Act.Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 – Section 67 – Confessional statement is inadmissible in the trial of an offence under the NDPS Act.Hon’ble Ms. Justice Hima Kohli pronounced the Reportable Order of the Bench comprising Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India, Hon’ble Mr. Justice Surya Kant and Her Ladyship.For Petitioner(s) Mr. Gopal Sankaranarayanan, Sr. Adv. Mr. R.C. Paul Kanagaraj, Adv. Mr. Karuppaiah Meyyappan, Adv. Mr. Raghunatha Sethupathy B., Adv. Kanika Kalaiyarasan, Adv. Mr. Shrutanjaya Bhardwaj, Adv. Mr. Abhishek Kalaiyarasan, Adv. Ms. Pariksha, Adv. Mr. Nirnimesh Dube, AOR Mr. Anand Grover, Sr. Adv. Ms. Tripti Tandon, Adv. Mr. Satbir Singh Pillania, Adv. Signature Not Verified Mr. Sandiv Kalia, Adv. Digitally signed by Vishal Anand Mr. Nand Ram, Adv. Date: 2021.12.13 17:51:13 IST Reason: Mr. Somvir Deswal, Adv. Ms. Reena Rao, Adv. Dr. Sushil Balwada, AOR For Respondent(s) Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, ASG Mr. Rupesh Kumar, Adv. Mr. Archna Pathak Dave, Adv. Mr. Rajat Nair, Adv. Ms. Deepabali Dutta, Adv. Mr. Mukesh Kumar Maroria, AOR