Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 – Ss. 13 (2) r/w. 13(1)(e) – Penal Code, 1860 – Ss. 120B & 109 – Criminal Conspiracy – The material to implicate someone as a conspirator acting in concert with a public servant, alleged to have committed misconduct, under the PCA, or amassed assets disproportionate to a public servant’s known sources of income, has to be on firm ground.The ingredients of the offence of criminal conspiracy are that there should be an agreement between the persons who are alleged to conspire and the said agreement should be for doing of an illegal act or for doing, by illegal means, an act which by itself may not be illegal. In other words, the essence of criminal conspiracy is an agreement to do an illegal act and such an agreement can be proved either by direct evidence or by circumstantial evidence or by both and in a matter of common experience that direct evidence to prove conspiracy is rarely available. Accordingly, the circumstances proved before and after the occurrence have to be considered to decide about the complicity of the accused. Even if some acts are proved to have been committed, it must be clear that they were so committed in pursuance of an agreement made between the accused persons who were parties to the alleged conspiracy. Inferences from such proved circumstances regarding the guilt may be drawn only when such circumstances are incapable of any other reasonable explanation. In other words, an offence of conspiracy cannot be deemed to have been established on mere suspicion and surmises or inference which are not supported by cogent and acceptable evidence.Case Number : Criminal Appeal No. 1590 Of 2021 (@ Special Leave Petition (crl.) No. 9608 Of 2021 (@slp (crl.) Diary No. 42589 Of 2018) December 9, 2021 (Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 25-05-2017 in CRLRC No. 73/2017 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Madras)Hon’ble Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat pronounced the judgment of the Bench comprising Hon’ble Mr. Justice K. M. Joseph and His Lordship.For Petitioner(s) Mr. Arvind Kumar Sharma, AOR For Respondent(s) Mr. Ramesh Allanki, Adv. Ms. Aruna Gupta, AOR Mr. Syed Ahmad, Adv.