Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – Ss. 173 (2), 482 – Penal Code, 1860 – Ss. 498A, 323, 504, 506, 304B – Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 – S. 3, 4 – Making the family members of husband as accused by making casual reference to them in matrimonial disputes – Proceedings Quashed.The appellants are brother-in-law and mother-inlaw respectively of the deceased. A perusal of the complaint filed by the 2nd respondent, pursuant to which a crime was registered, does not indicate any specific allegations by disclosing the involvement of the appellants. It is the specific case of the 1st appellant that he was working as a cashier in ICICI Bank at Khalilabad branch, which is at about 40 kms from Gorakhpur. The alleged incident was on 24.07.2018 at about 8 p.m. When the investigation was pending, the 1st appellant has filed affidavit before Senior Superintendent of Police on 08.08.2018, giving his employment details and stated that he was falsely implicated. It was his specific case that during the relevant time, he was working at ICICI Bank, Khalilabad branch, Gorakhpur and his mother was also staying with him. The Branch Manager has endorsed his presence in the branch, showing in-time at 09:49 a.m. and out-time at 06:25 p.m. Even in the statement of 2 nd respondent recorded by the police and also in the final report filed under Section 173(2) of Cr.P.C., except omnibus and vague allegations, there is no specific allegation against the appellants to show their involvement for the offences alleged.Even in the counter affidavits filed on behalf of respondent nos.1 and 2, it is not disputed that the 1st appellant was working in ICICI Bank at Khalilabad branch, but merely stated that there was a possibility to reach Gorakhpur by 8 p.m. Though there is an allegation of causing injuries, there are no other external injuries noticed in the postmortem certificate, except the single ante-mortem injury i.e. ligature mark around the neck, and the cause of death is shown as asphyxia. Having regard to the case of the appellants and the material placed on record, we are of the considered view that except vague and bald allegations against the appellants, there are no specific allegations disclosing the involvement of the appellants to prosecute them for the offences alleged.Hon’ble Mr. Justice R. Subhash Reddy pronounced the Reportable Judgment of the Bench comprising His Lordship and Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hrishikesh Roy.For Petitioner(s) Ms. Vibha Datta Makhija, Sr. Adv. Mr. Fuzail Ahmad Ayyubi, Aor Mr. Praveen Gaur, Adv. Mr. Karan Mamgain, Adv. Ms. Shaiya Khanna, Adv. Mr. Ibad Mushtaq, Adv. Ms. Akanksha Rai, Adv. Mr. Fuzail Ahmad Ayyubi, AOR For Respondent(s) Mr. Anuvrat Sharma, AOR Mr. Mohd. Asad Khan. Adv. Mr. Shashank Singh, AOR Dr. Anil Kumar Gupta, Adv. Mr. Anupam Choudhary, Adv. Mr. Danish Zubair Khan, AOR