Bombay High CourtDrinkar Ananda Decore vs Shantaram Punjaji Ahed And Ors. on 27 February, 1981Equivalent citations: AIR 1982 Bom 99Author: MasodkarBench: Masodkar, KanadeJUDGMENT Masodkar, J.1. The debated issue in the present petition relates to the jurisdiction of the Assistant judge, Nasik,to entertain Election Petition No. 7 of 1979 and further to the disqualification that has been foundagainst the present petitioner in view of the provisions of S. 16(1) (a) (I) of the Maharashtra ZillaParishads and Panchayat Samitis Act, 1961, for, admittedly, the petitioners wife is a primary teachersince sept, 3, 1965 and she was posted at Deola at the time of election of the petitioner as a memberto the Panchayat Samiti , Kalvan from Deola Electoral College and sha has been thereafter serving asa primary teacher at village Adgoan which falls in the Panchayat Samiti area of Nasik . Holding thatthe petitioner was disqualified under S. 16(1) (a) (I) of the Maharashtra Zilla Parishad andPanchayat Samitis Act, 1961 to be the member of the Panchayat Samiti, his election has been setaside.2. Mr. Kankaria , the learned counsel , in support of the present petition, mainly urged three points.Firstly, the learned counsel contented that in view of the Rules framed under S.14 of theMaharashtra Zilla Parishad and Panchayat Samitis Act ,1961 which are made applicable because ofS. 58(1-A) thereof to the election to the Panchayat Samiti , the election petitioner could , at the most,at the time of scrutiny of nomination papers, raise such an objection. Under the rules framed,against the decision of the returning officer, an appeal is provided and the decision in appeal ismade final. The learned counsel submits that at no other stage the question of disqualification canbe re- agitated. Secondly, it is contended that the remedy provided for by S.27 of the MaharashtraZilla Parishad and Panchayat Samitis Act, 1961, does not confer the jurisdiction on the electionCourt to enquire into the matters of the disqualification of the returned candidate . Reliance isplaced on the division Bench decision of this court in the case of Gopikisan Agarwal v. DistrictJudge, Bhandhra, 1966 Mah LJ 321, which followed the earlier judgement of this court rendered byanother Division Bench in the case of Venkatrao Vithalrao v. Vithal Sambhaji, 1963 Mah LJ 834. Onthe authority of this decision , the learned counsel submitted that under S. 27, the question ofdisqualification of the petitioner could not have been gone into and the eventual order impugned inthe present petition is thus without jurisdiction . Lastly, it is contended that upon proper reading ofS. 58 (1-A) , which, by reference incorporates S.16 , matters of disqualification with regard tomembers of Panchayat Samiti, as far as the provisions of sub-s (1) (I) are concerned, will have to beread as indicating that before a person is held disqualified, he should have direct or indirect share orinterest in any work done by order of the Panchayat Samiti in place of Zilla Parishad or in any workdone by order of the Panchayat Samiti in place of the Zilla Parishad or in any contract with, by or onbehalf of the Panchayat Samiti, in place of Zilla Parishad. The submission is that, the contract withthe Zilla Parishad is not the contract with the Panchayat Samiti, and therefore, the employment ofthe wife of the petitioner by the Zilla Parishad in a primary school of Adgaon in the area of anotherPanchayat Samiti, would not be a disqualification . As a second limb of this submission , the learnedcounsel submitted that, the provisions of the Act show that the Panchayat Samiti is an independentDrinkar Ananda Decore vs Shantaram Punjaji Ahed And Ors. on 27 February, 1981Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1090244/1entity and as such , is capable of employing servants and having contracts. Unless, therefore , thereexists such type of contract, S. 16(1) (I) is not attracted. Even otherwise , the submission is that thematters of primary education and the employment with regard to education , are not exclusivematters of contract, but are Governed by the provisions of the Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947.It is contended that , at the most the contract of employment of a teacher in a primary school wouldbe a statutory contract within the meaning of that Act, and if it is the State which finances thematters of primary education , in substance, the contract will be at the most with the StateGovernment or with regard to the matters of State Activities. Reliance is places particularly on Chap.V of the Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947, to submit that such a contract is liable to beterminated by the modality indicated by that Act. In view of the provisions , the learned counselsubmits that the requirement of S, 16 (1) (I) is not fully satisfied. The provision of disqualification ,according to the learned counsel , being of the penal nature , shaould be strictly construed andshould be strictly answered. There is, in his submission , an apparent error committed by thelearned Election Judge in assuming that all these requirements have been satisfied.3. We have given our anxious consideration to all these points raised by the learned counsel.4. As far as the jurisdiction under S. 27 of the Maharashtra Zilla Parishad and panchayat Samitis Act, 1961, is concerned, in our view, the matter is no more res integra. No doubt, as far as passage offinding the jurisdiction with regard to the adjudication of the disputed qualification is concerned,the two judgements relied upon by the learned counsel , being Venkatrao's case reported in 1963Mah LJ 834 and Gopikishan's case reported in 1966 Mah LJ 321, did hold that the remedy under S.27 of the Act , was a restricted remedy and because of the rules , the question of disqualificationcould not be subject matter of issue in an election petition under S.27 . However, all this contraversy, though no douby under a different statute , i.e. the Maharashtra Municipalities Act, 1965containing pari materia provisions, for providing of adjudicatory forum for deciding electiondisputes and the scope thereof under similar rules, has been examined by the full Bench of thisCourt in the case of Dattatraya v. Prabhakar , . There , the basic decision in Venkatran's case above,which was followed to Gopikisan's case was in terms eited along with the Rules which are atmostidentical and the Court stated that in the view of the Full Bench, the view taken by another DivisionBench of this Court in spl.Civil appla No. 345 of 1962, Radhabai Bajrangtal Jaisal v. State ofMaharashtra decided on Peb. 11, 1964, (1964 Mah LJ Notice 65) which was deating with similarprovisions under the Bombay Village Pair provisions under the Bombay Village Panchayats Act,1938 was preferable to the view taken in Venkatran's case which was dealing with the provisions ofthe present Act. I.e. the Maharashira Zitta Parishands and Panchayar Samitis Act. 1961. Theauthority of the Division Bench judgment, thereore, which normally we are bound to follow andapply, is shaken and in fact, has not been approved by the Full Bench of the Court though dealingwith the question that arose under the Maharashtra Municipalities Act, 1965. The Full Benchobserved, after referring to the Rutes not the provisions of section 27 as well as the observations inVenkatran's case to the following effect;"The well recongnised distinction that exists between the provisions of the statute and those of rulesmade in excrcise of the power of subordinate legislation, was overlooked in this case. If rules cannotbe rreconciled with the provisions of the statute under which they are framed, then, provisions ofDrinkar Ananda Decore vs Shantaram Punjaji Ahed And Ors. on 27 February, 1981Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1090244/2the stutute must always prevail, though every possible attempt should be made to reconcite if itcould be done, but if they cannot be reconciled, then, to the extent to which the provisions of therules are inconsistent with the provisions of the rules are inconsistent with the provisions the rulesto that extent will be bad and they cannot be given overiding effect over the provisions of the statute.This aspect of the matter which was considered by the carlier Division Bench in Radhabai's case(1964 Mah LJ (Notes) 65) was overlooked. Apart from this, even the language of S. 14 (2) ofMaharashtra Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samitis Act is materially different from that of S. 17 ofthe Act. In our view, the view taken in Radhabai's case is preferable to the view that has been takenin Venkatro's case by the Division Bench."5. It is obvious that the Division Bench judgment, on which reliance is placed by the learned counsel,preoceeded on a different principle and, as is pointed our by the Full Bench, did not apply theprinciple that the rules cannot travel beyond the terms of the statute. The jurisdiction of ElectionCourt is created by the statute, while the jurisdiction in the matter of hearing of the appeal at thestage of scrutiny, is conferred and created by the rules. It should be impermissible for the rules tocut down the statutor) jurisdiction created by the parent enactment.6. Though, on doubt as a matter of precedent the Full Bench of this Court was dealing with thesimilar provisions of Section 21 of the Maharashira Municipalities Act, 1965, and the rules framedunder that Act is similar terms andmade these observation, we think thjat such observations whichhave the foundation in identical tindings to shake the authority of the earlier judgment of theDivision Bench duly considered by the Full Bench dealing with the kdentical or similar issues. TheMatter of distinction has been pointed out by the Full Bench decision and it will not be proper for usto apply the ratio of the two earlier Division Bench judgments, so as to render a judgment, whichwill directly conflict with the holding of the Full Bench. Not only this, but the judgment of FullBench Not only this, but the judgment of Full Bench of this Court has been approved by theSupreme Court in the case of Madhukar v. Jaswant, AIR 1976 Sc 2282. There, the Court was dealingwith the provisions of the Maharashtra Municipalities Act, 1965 and the matters of disqualificationand the powers of the Election Court under Section 21 of the Act. While considering the language ofS. 21 and the jurisidiction conferred upon the Election Court, the Supreme Court observed that anElection Pention under S. 21 was all-inclusive and not under-inclusive and went on the furtherobserve (at p. 2298)."What we mean is that even if the invalldation of the election is on the score of the disqualincationunder S. 16 it is appropriate to raise that point under S. 21 which is comprehensive. All grounds onthe strength of which an election can be demolished can beraised, in a preoceedings under Section21, The language of the provision is wide enough."The language of S. 27 of the present Act and that of S. 21 of the Municipalities Act 1965 is partmateria and is smimilar. On the authority of the above jugement of the supreme court and also ofthe Full Bench of this Court in Dattatraya's case (spra), it must be concluded that the authority ofthe earlier two judgment rendered in Benkatrao's case and in Gopikisan's case, holding that thematters of disqualification cannot be raised under Sec. 27 of the present Act, is is shaken and is notavailable as a good law, On the other hand, the decision of the Supreme Court in Madhukar's caseDrinkar Ananda Decore vs Shantaram Punjaji Ahed And Ors. on 27 February, 1981Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1090244/3clearly shows that such a challenge is permissible under S. 27 of the Act and the Election Court iscompetent to consider matters of disqualification.7. Once we rule in this manner, what really remains is a question of fact and finding within theprovisions os S. 16 (1) (a) (I) As far as disqualification by contract of service by the wife with thecorporate body is concerned, Dattatraya's case (FB) under a similar statute is a good aughority thatsuch a service does disable the person, as well as the husband of the servant.8. We have indicated how Mr. Kankaria wants to get out of the provisions of Section 16 (1) (a) (I) byreferring to the provisions of S. 58 (1A) and the provisions of the Bombay Primary Education Act,1947.9. As far as S. 58 (1A) is concerned, its enacting, purpose is clear, in that, for the purpose of clectingtwo members by direct election under S. 57 (1) (f), the provisions of Ss. 14, 15, 15-A, 16, 17 and 18with regard to the date or election, qualifications for being elected and disqualifications and therights to vote are being incorporated in Section 58 itself. Section 57 deals with the constitutionPanchayat Samities and provides that two members of such Panchayat Samitis are to be elected bydirect election from electoral Colleges. For these direct elections, the provisions of Ss. 14 to 18 havebeen made applicable and sub-section (1A) of S. 58 states that the same "shall apply in relation tothe members of a Panchayat Samiti as they apply in relation to the Councillors of a Zilla Parishadwith the modifications that ...........". What is being contended is that in S. 16, which is enacted frothe purpose of laying down disqualifications of Councillors of the Zilla Parishad, the Court shouldread, for the words "Zilla Parishad" the words "Panchayat Samiti" as wherever the word "Councillor"occurs, it is required to be read as the word 'member' If so read. Cl. (I) of sub-section (1) of S. 16 willindicate that what is intended is to lay down a disqualification because of direct or indirect share orinterest in the contract with the Panchayat Samiti. In other words, if the contract be with the ZillaParishad". The words "Panchayat Samito" as wherever the word "Councillor" occurs, it is required tobe read as the word "member" It so read. Ci (I) of sub-section (1) of S. 16 will indicate that what isintended is to lay down a disqualification because of direct or indirect share or interest in thecontract with the Panchayat Samiti. In other ords, if the contract be with the Zilla Parishad, anotherstatutoty authority, then that cannot be imported as a disqualification, for the purpose of being amember of the Panchayat Samiti. It was suggested that the words in sub-section (1A) of S. 58 "asthey apply in relation to" will only mean that the words occurring, having reference to Zilla parishad,are being substituted by similar words having reference to Panchayat Samiti. A reference was alsomade to S, 62. Wherein the provision in made with regard to the member of the Panchayat Samitibecomes disqualified under section 58. From this it is contended, that in s. 16 we will have toperforce of law, read, in place of words "Zilla Parishad". The present contract with the Zilla Parishadcannot be the contract that would render the petitioner disqualified,. Now, the matters ofdisqualification rests on certain basic accepted principles, the first and foremost being that which isenacted for the purpose of mainlaining the purity of administration and for the purpose of avoidingpossible conflict of interest and duty of the holder of the public officer an interpretation that willsubserve this statutory purpose will have to be preferred to the one which tends to be grammaticalro literal. Equatly correct is the proposition that, unless enacted, the disqualification cannot beassumed and an applicative effort has to be made to find out the exact terms of disqualification.Drinkar Ananda Decore vs Shantaram Punjaji Ahed And Ors. on 27 February, 1981Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1090244/410. In the scheme of the present Act. Zilla Parishad is a consututed, corporate body. Chapter II dealswith its constitution ans Sec. 8 with its incorporation. Section 7 of the Act, enumerates theauthorities which are charged with the duty to carry out the provisions of the Act, the first being thezills Parishad and the second being the Panchayat Samiti, followed by other committees, authoritiesand others. All the incident, or statutory corporation have been expressly enacted to favour of theZilla Parishad required to be so constituted. The constitution of the Panchayat Samiti isindependently dealt with the Chap. III and that shows that it is a legal bocy created for the specificpurpose and not by itself an independent corporation. Section 57 denls with the constitution ofPanchayat Samiti which is a body established at the Block level of the District. Councillors from theBlock level of the District. Councillors from the Block of the Zilla Parishad become exofficiomembers of the Panchayat Samiti under S. 57 (1) (a). Followed by the co-opted Councillors, if anyresiding in the Block. (S. 57 (1) (b) ). Clauses (c) and (d) of sub-section (1) of Section 57 deal with therepresentative of the co-operative society, while Cl. (E) with a woman representative, Clause (f)permits two members to be elected by direct election from electoral colleges. This constitutionshows that a direct clection has to be hald only under S. 57 (1) (f) with regard to the tworepresentatives to be elected in the manner provided for by S. 58. The Block Development Officer isthe ex-officio secretsry of the Panchayat Samiti. No doubt, the other provisions indicate theat theoffice of the member has a statutory tenure as well as the Panchayat Samiti has to have theChairman and Deputy Chairman. Followed by the scheme of S. 7, a provision is also made toconstitute other committees. After this statutory constitution of the different authorities is so laiddown. Chap. VI deals with the powers and duties of the Zilla Parishad. Panchayat Samiti andCommittees. Section 100 deal with the administrative powers and duties of the Zilla Parishad whilesection 101 with that of Panchayat Samiti, the former having reference to the First Schedule, whilethe latter having reference to the Second Schedule. The First Schedule shows several subjects ofactivities, including the development activities, which are made the part of the duty of the ZillaParishad to carry on, so far as its district funds may allos. Entries under the heading Education from24 to 29 include, at Entry 24, the establishment, management, maintenantice, inspection, etc, ofprimary schools and that Entry 24 includes the matter of powers vested in the State Government,under the provisions of the Bombay Primary Education Act. 1947, A similar scheme is available inSection 101 with regard to the Second Schedule, laying down that it would be the primaryresponsibility of the Panchayat Samiti so far as funds at its disposal will allow, to make reasonableprovision for the matters enumerated by the Second Schedule, and that includes item (23-a) withregard to the management of primary schools.11. These provisions unmistakably show that, as far as the primary educaion is concerned, it is theduty of the Zilla Parishad and its management of primary schools also falls under item (23-a) of theSecond Schedule. The scheme of the Act shows that the district funds are at the disposal of the ZillaParishad, our of which the funds are made available to Panchayat Samitik for the purpose ofcarrying our its various functions. The matter is not different, even if the reference is made toBombay Primary Education Act, 1947, chapter III of the Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947 dealswith powers, duties and functions of Zilla Parishads and other bodies like the AuthorisedMunicipalities and Municipal School boards. Sub-section (1) of S. 13 of that Act provides that theZilla Parishad shall have control over all approved schools and sub-section (2) of S. 13 furtherprovides that the Zilla Parishad shall perform the duties and functions one of which is to maintainanDrinkar Ananda Decore vs Shantaram Punjaji Ahed And Ors. on 27 February, 1981Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1090244/5adequats. Number of primary schools. It is obvious therefore that both under the Maharashtra ZillaParishads and Panchayat Samities Act. 1961 as well as under the Bombay Primary Education Act,1947, the Zilla Parishad is obliged, not only to supervise the primary schools but also to maintainadequate number of schools by itself. When such Zilla Parishad Schools are within the area of theBlock. It can be consistently read, in view of the Second Sehedule, item (23-A) that the managementof such shoold is also the responsibility of the Panchayat Samiti.12. The character of the Panchayat Samiti in relation to the Zilla Parished is clearly one of legalauthority charged with the duty by the statute, with regard to the matters primarily availble in theSecond schedule.. The administration of the district under the Act vests in the corporate body calledZilla Parished. It is only at the Block level that a legal authority is created as a statutory functionaryand is made avilable for carrying out the statuory purpose as may be laid down even by ZillaParished Act. Section 106 deals with the powers and functions of Zill parishad, while Secion 108deals with the powers and functions of Panchayat Samiti. Clause (e) of S. 108 (e) enjoins upon thePanchayat Samiti to perform such function of the Zilla Parishad as are delegated to it by or on behalfof the Zilla Parishad. Similarly Cl. (D) of S. 108 (I) enjoints upon the Panchayat Samiti toexecutemaintain, supervise and administer the works and developmnet schemes of the Zillaparishad as are delegated to it by or on behalf of the Zilla Parisha. Section 108-A lays down that thePanchayat Samati shall conform to any instructions that may be given to it by the Zilla Parishad inthe execcution by the Panchayat Samiti of its duties and functions under the Act. Therefore, itfollows that the Panchayat Samiti is a leagal body which is subjected to the jurisdiction and power ofthe Zilla Parishad to the extent expressly stated by these various provisions.13. We have referred to these provisions so as to indicate the purpose as to who it is not necessary tofollow the approach of interpretation suggested by the learned counsel so as to read S. 16 (1) (I) bysubstituting practical purposes, Panchayat Samiti it a statutory delegate available to the ZillaParishad in the matter os execution of its own schemes and contracts. We have indicated that as faras the primary education is concerned, even by virtue of Second Schedule, a duty case on thePanchayat Samiti to manage the primary schools. In the light of this, the purpose of Cl. (I) ofsub-section (1) of S. 16 is clear, in that the member of the Panchayat Samiti should not have thedirect or indirect share or interest in the contract with, by or on behalf of the Zilla Parishad. Such acontract may eventually be within the functional management of the Panchayat Samiti itself andthat is the reason why the words "Zilla Parishad" need not be substitued by the words "PanchayatSamiti". As is being canvassed for by the learned counsel.14. The provisions of S. 58 (1A) introduced clearly a scheme by reference to the earlier provisionsand the sub-section itself is self-contained with regard to the matters of modification and changes,that are required to be made in the earlier provisions, like, Ss. 14, 15, 15-A, 16, 17 and 18. Thesemodificationa dn enacted as such. Firstly, these sections have been made applicable in relation tothe members of the Panchayat Samiti, as they apply in relation to the Councillors of the ZillaParishad. Having applied in this manner, the specific modifications have been enacted with regardto the changes in the text of Ss. 12, 16 and 17, It is obvious, therefore, that while applying theseprovisions no other moditications could be introduced having recourse, as is suggested andsubmitted by the leaned counsel for the petitioner, so as to substitute in Cl. (I), of sub-section (1) ofDrinkar Ananda Decore vs Shantaram Punjaji Ahed And Ors. on 27 February, 1981Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1090244/6S. 16 the words "Panchayat Samiti" in place of the words "Panchayat Samiti" That would be readinga modification by implication, a course quite hazardous and also not necessary to further the clearobject and intent of the provisions of S. 16 (1) (I).15. Therefore, once it it shown that there exists a disqualification by virtue of direct or indirectinterest with regard to the contract with the Zilla Parishad, the disqualification operates and isavailable, as far as the member of the Panchayat Samiti is concerned. It is not necessary in all casesthat such a contract must be with the Panchayat Samiti so as to attract the said disqualification.16. Wherver the Legislature intended to lay down independent disqualification que the matter ofPanchayat Samiti. It has chosen to say so, by using the language Zilla Parishad of the PanchayatSamito, as is available in S. 16 (1) (a) (I). So also, when any other body was to be indicated like theVillage Panchayat, specific mention of such a body, is available in S. 16 (1) (h) "a Panchayat Samiti ofZilla Parishad or under of in the gift of the Government". So is the position with regard in Cl. (K). Nodoubt cach of the clauses from (a) to (m) of sub-section (a) of S. 16 is an independent subject byitself, but its text can offer a guideline in the matters of interpreting the ohter clauses. Particularlywhen an interpretative debate is raised suggesting the modifications in the taxt of a clause like thepresent one, because of its application to the members of the Panchayat Samiti. The whole of thetext of S. 16. Because of the enacting provision of sub-section (1A) of S. 58, is presently under the parof S. 58 itself and member of the Panchayat Samiti it subjected to the process of disqualificationbecause of the enacting part of S.58, sub-section (!A) and not merely because of enactment of S. 16of the Act. For all purposes, this would be a disqualification under S. 58 itself and that is how theLegislature understands the seheme of S. 58. This is evident from the provisions of S. 67 wherereference is in Cl. (1) (a) to the disqualification "under S. 28". Section 58 by itself does not lay downthe disqualification, but incorporates, by reference to the provisions with regard to thedisqualifications, by enacting Section 16 as a part of sub-section (1A) thereof. Once this enactedarrangement is available, if follows that we will have to read the whole S. 16 as it is the body ofsub-section (1A) of S. 58 and so read the enacted Cl. (I) of sub-section (1) would take in thedisqualification as against the Panchayat Samiti Members when he/she has direct or indriect byhimself or by his pariner, any share or interest in any work done by order of the Zilla Parishad or inany contract with, by or on behalf of the Zilla parishad.17. An arugment was advanced that this interpretation will not cover cases where the contract isexclusively with the Panchayat Samiti. We do not think so, The position of the Panchayat Samiti, asis indicated, is that of a statutory authority and it is really an instrumentality of the Zilla Parishaditself. A person having contract of the nature contemplated by Cl. (I) of Sec. 16(1) given by thePanchayat Samiti would nonetheless be having an interest in the contract which is either by or onbehalf of the Zilla Parishad. The scheme of the various functions of the Panchayat Samiti. Itsstatutory funds and its subordination to the Zilla Parishad, clearly goes to show that it is not anindependent corporation as such. It is a statutory instrumentality at the Block level, available for thepurpose of the Zilla Parishad, and interest of its works would be the interest in the works of ZillaParishad, it will be futile to contend that when the work is being done, if it be the case of a work, ofthe contract is being executed if it be the case of a contract. The Zilla Parishad will not have anyinterest, either in the execution, implementation of possession of the work or of the contract. TheDrinkar Ananda Decore vs Shantaram Punjaji Ahed And Ors. on 27 February, 1981Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1090244/7integrated scheme of the present Act shows that the define district is placed under theadministration of Zilla Parishad and for the administration of Zilla Parishad and for the purpose ofdevelopment works and schemes, in the jurisdiction of the Zilla parishad several instrumentalitieshave been created as as to achieve the objects of the Act. Though the Panchayat Samiti is constitutedas an authority, that by itself is not enough to confer a separate identity on its functioning so as totaken away the contracts out of the interest that Zilla parishad has. This approach furthers the objectto avoild possibility of conflict of interest with public duty attached to the officer of the member ofthe Panchayat Samiti. We have, therefore, no manner of doubt that the words in S. 16 (1) (I) arewide enough to include the contracts given assuming it can be so given, by the pauchayat Samati butthat would normally b in the interet of the Zilla Parishad so as to attract the disqualification.18. This conclusion is reinforced. If we see the scheme of the district fund, which is placed at thedisposal of the Zilla Parishad, It is the Zilla Parishad who can levy taxes or collect the fees and it isone of the obligations of the Zilla Parishad to set apart and allocate moneys out of that fund even tothe Panchayat Samiti. Section 104 makes district fund ordinarily liable for all costs and expensesincluding the liability that arises under any contract or agreement in relation to any PanchayatSamiti. Therefore, we are satisfied that without the substitution of the words "Zilla Parishad" by thewords "Panchayat Samiti" as is argued, the efficacy of Cl. (I) of S. 16 (1) is not whittled down, northere is any scope to avoid the disqualification by reason of the contract with the Panchayat Samiti,which would obviously be a part of the activity in relation to the Zilla Parishad and thus within theterms of Cl. (I).19. There is yet another principle which must be applied to the matters of disqualification. We haveindicated above that Section 16 by process of statutory incorporation is the part os S. 58. As far asthe constitution of Panchayat Samiti is concerned, it does not merely consist of the electedmembers, as is provided by the process of holding election under S. 58, but there are othermembers, like councillors, who are elected to the Panchayat Samiti from the electoral divisionsincluded in the Block. Similarly, there are co-opted councillors residing in block and further are themembers who come under Cls (c), (d) and (e) of S. 57 (1), By virtue of the constitution provided fromin Section 57 all those who come under these different categories from Cls. (A) to (f) of sub-section(1), become the members of the Panchayat Samiti. While interpreting the matters ofdisqualifications which are the matters of disabling the holders of the publie officer qua the publicoffice, we think the interpretative approach should be to achieve and apply the uniform norms in thematters of qualifications and disqualifications. This principle fo uniformity underlies the scheme ofincorporation by reference in the terms of sub-section (1A) of S. 58. If subjects the members, to beelected under S. 57 (1) (f), to the same process of qualifications for being elected, anddisqualifications for being elected, and disqualifications as applies to councillors. That shows that toall categories or members the Legislature intends that the mettrs of disqualification shall applyuniformly and in the same mannter. This scheme is further clarified by the provisions of S. 62dealing with the disqualification of a member of Panchayat Samiti. That has a reference to themembber of the Panchayat Samiti other than a councillor, By that a member other than a councillor.Is subjected to the disqualifications enacted by S. 58, while the councillor remains subject to thesame dusqualification by virtue of Section 16 of the Act. If we were to read the changes in S. 16 (1) (I)by substituting the word "Panchayat Samiti" in place or the words "Zilla Parishad". Then obviouslyDrinkar Ananda Decore vs Shantaram Punjaji Ahed And Ors. on 27 February, 1981Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1090244/8there would be two different types of disqualifications with regard to the members under S. 27 (1) (f)and the councillors who become the members under other clauses of sub-section (1) of S. 57.Though the councillors, by virtue of their office, become the member of the Panchayat Samiti withregard to them a different rule of the disqualification will apply while with regard to the memberswho are elected because of the election under S. 58, different rule with regard to the same matterwill be operative.20. By suggesting interpretation, it is not necessary to work out any such antithetical results. Thesaid interpretation, as we indicated above, assumes a total independence and identity in favour ofPanchayat Samiti, the position, however, being just the otherwise. An instrumentality for specificpurpose need not be equated with the corporation. When such an instrumentality enters in anycontract. It should necessarity follos that a corporate body like Zilla Parishad under the presentstatute would be interested in execution as well as the fruits of such contracts. Therefore, uniformtythe councillors and members are subjected to the same disqualification. Furthermore this principleof uniformity required that all those who become the members of the panchayat Samiti eitherbecause of their being the councillors residing in the Block or because of their election, should besubjected to the similar process or disqalification. Such a disqualification is very much enacted interms bu S. 16 (17) (I) and, because of subsection (1A) of S. 28. Is made applicable to those who areelected under S. 28 and become the members of the Panchayat Samiti.21. We therefore hold that the contract of service as teacher in the Zilla Parishad Primary Schoolofthe wife of the present petitioner is within the disqualification enacted by S. 16 (1) (I) applicable,because of sub-section (1A) of S. 58, to the petitioner.22. In view of all this, we find no merits in any of the submissions of the learned counsel. Ruledischarged with no order as to costs.23. Petition dismissed.Drinkar Ananda Decore vs Shantaram Punjaji Ahed And Ors. on 27 February, 1981Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1090244/9