Succession Act, 1925 – S. 63 – Evidence Act, 1872 – S. 68 – Legal principles with regard to the proof of a will.The propounder of the will must examine one or more attesting witnesses and the onus is placed on the propounder to remove all suspicious circumstances with regard to the execution of the will.The following three aspects must be proved by a propounder:1. that the will was signed by the testator in a sound and disposing state of mind duly understanding the nature and effect of disposition and he put his signature on the document of his own free will, and2. when the evidence adduced in support of the will is disinterested, satisfactory and sufficient to prove the sound and disposing state of the testator’s mind and his signature as required by law, courts would be justified in making a finding in favour of propounder, and3. if a will is challenged as surrounded by suspicious circumstances, all such legitimate doubts have to be removed by cogent, satisfactory and sufficient evidence to dispel suspicion. In other words, the onus on the propounded can be taken to be discharged on proof of the essential facts indicated therein.When a will is allegedly shrouded in suspicion, its proof ceases to be a simple lis between the plaintiff and the defendant. What generally is an adversarial proceeding, becomes in such cases, a matter of the Court’s conscience and then, the true question which arises for consideration is, whether, the evidence let in by the propounder of the will is such as would satisfy the conscience of the Court that the will was duly executed by the testator. It is impossible to reach such a satisfaction unless the party which sets up the will offers cogent and convincing explanation with regard to any suspicious circumstance surrounding the making of the will.Suspicious Circumstances The following may be found to be surrounded in the execution of the will:1. The signature of the testator may be very shaky and doubtful or not appear to be his usual signature.2. The condition of the testator’s mind may be very feeble and debilitated at the relevant time.3. The disposition may be unnatural, improbable or unfair in the light of relevant circumstances like exclusion of or absence of adequate provisions for the natural heirs without any reason.4. The dispositions may not appear to be the result of the testator’s free will and mind.5. The propounder takes a prominent part in the execution of the will.6. The testator used to sign blank papers.7. The will did not see the light of the day for long.8. Incorrect recitals of essential facts.The circumstances narrated hereinbefore are not exhaustive. Subject to offering of a reasonable explanation, existence thereof must be taken into consideration for the purpose of arriving at a finding as to whether the execution of the will had been duly proved or not.There are several circumstances which would have been held to be described as suspicious circumstances:1. When a doubt is created in regard to the condition of mind of the testator despite his signature on the will;2. When the disposition appears to be unnatural or wholly unfair in the light of the relevant circumstances;3. Where propounder himself takes prominent part in the execution of will which confers on him substantial benefit.The court must satisfy its conscience as regards due execution of the will by the testator and the court would not refuse to probe deeper into the matter only because the signature of the propounder on the will is otherwise proved. There exists a distinction where suspicions are well founded and the cases where there are only suspicions alone. Existence of suspicious circumstances alone may not be sufficient. The court may not start with a suspicion and it should not close its mind to find the truth. A resolute and impenetrable incredulity is not demanded from the Judge even if there exist circumstances of grave suspicion.Will – Registration of – It may be true that the Will was a registered one, but the same by itself would not mean that the statutory requirements of proving the will need not be complied with.The appellants has adumbrated on the following suspicious circumstances in the execution of the will. They can be succinctly stated as under: (i) Date of the will and date of death of the testator being too close throws a doubt on the sound disposing state of mind of the testator. (ii) Testator was bedridden prior to his death as he was suffering from paralysis. (iii) Attestor (PW2) being known to the first plaintiff, the propounder of the will, but not to the deceased testator. (iv) The husband of the first plaintiff and son of the testator, who was a practicing advocate, was unaware of the execution of the will during his lifetime. (v) The signature on the will (Ex-P1) does not tally with the signatures of the testator on Ex-P2 (SSLC Register) and Ex-P3 (Extract of sanction plan). (vi) The evidence of PW1 and PW2 is not credible. (vii) There exists discrepancy in the evidence of PW1 and PW2. (viii) That the respondents-plaintiffs have failed to prove the will to the satisfaction of the conscience of the Court and have not removed the suspicious circumstances in the execution of the will.The respondents-plaintiffs have failed to prove the will (Ex-P1) in accordance with law inasmuch as they have not removed the suspicious circumstances, surrounding the execution of the will. Hence, Ex-P1, not being a valid document in the eye of law, no Letters of Administration can be granted to the respondents-plaintiffs.Hon’ble Mrs. Justice B.V. Nagarathna has pronounced the reportable judgment of the Bench comprising Hon’ble Mr. Justice L. Nageswara Rao and Her Ladyship.For Appellant(s) Mr. Rutwik Panda, AOR Mr. S.Valinayagam, Adv. Ms. Nikhar Berry Ms. Anshu Malik, Adv. For Respondent(s) Mr. K. K. Mani, AOR Ms. T. Archana, Adv.