Public Service Commission – Examination – Answer Key – On the date when the examination took place, State Minister for Panchayati Raj whose name is shown as the correct answer in terms of Option B had passed away – On the date when the questions were, in fact, set, one answer was correct (Option ‘B’) – It was unanimously decided that the candidates who have chosen option (‘B’) as correct answer or did not mark any option for the said question be awarded 01(one) mark and no action is required in respect of the candidates who have chosen option A, C, D as the correct answer of this question – The respondent, on the other hand, represented a section of those candidates who went ahead and gave an answer which was not correct by any yardstick, at any point of time. So, it is here that the Commission drew a distinction between the categories which would not therefore, in short, be characterised as palpably arbitrary.In June, 2015, the appellant issued an advertisement calling for applications for filling up the post of Gram Panchayat Adhikari. The Minister for Panchayati Raj, Department in the State of Uttar Pradesh, was one Shri Kailash Yadav. Examination, pursuant to the advertisement, was scheduled to take place on 21.02.2016. Shri Kailash Yadav passed away on 09.02.2016.In the examination, question No. 46 was as follows:The answer key came to be published on 25.02.2016. As is clear from the decision of the Commission in regard to question No. 46, as on the date when the examination took place on 21.02.2016, Shri Kailash Yadav whose name is shown as the correct answer in terms of Option B had passed away and therefore, Option B would not be correct answer.This is a case where as on the date when the examination took place, actually none of the answers which were given as options were correct. On the date when the questions were, in fact, set, one answer was correct (Option ‘B’). It is this rationale which apparently has weighed with the appellant Commission in deciding to award marks to those who have answered by ticking Option ‘B’. Those who did not answer any of the options, were given marks on the appellant’s premise that none of the answers were right. The respondent, on the other hand, represented a section of those candidates who went ahead and gave an answer which was not correct by any yardstick, at any point of time. So, it is here that the Commission drew a distinction between the categories which would not therefore, in short, be characterised as palpably arbitrary.As far as the other litigation in the form of the order passed by the High Court in which the counsel for the appellant commission took the stand that one mark is made available to all candidates across the Board and the contention based thereon by the respondent is concerned, the stand of the appellant is that no candidate in the position of the respondent who has given a wrong answer (answer other than option B) has been given one mark. We record this statement. It is stated to be part of the rejoinder affidavit also.In such circumstances, we are of the view that, in the facts of this case, the appellant has made out a case for interference. Appeal is allowed and the impugned judgment stands set aside.CORAM : HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE K.M. JOSEPH HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHAFor Appellant(s) Mr. M. R. Shamshad, AOR Mr. Arijit Sarkar, Adv. Ms. Nabeela Jamil, Adv. Mr. Niaz A. Farooqui, Adv. Mr. Zaki Ahmad Khan, Adv. For Respondent(s) Mr. Piyush Singh, Adv. Mr. Aditya Parolia, Adv. Mr. Akshay Srivastava, Adv. Mr. Sourav Sharma, Adv. Mr. Rajesh Kumar, Adv. Mr. Gaurav Goel, AOR Mr. Adarsh Upadhyay, AOR