Hindu Law – Joint Hindu Family Property – Right of the Karta to execute agreement to sell or sale deed – Alienation by Father – What is legal necessity.Maintenance of coparceners, family members, marriage expenses, performance of necessary funerals or family ceremonies, costs of necessary litigation for recovering or preserving estate, etc. fall and have been held to be family’s necessities. Further, the instances are not the only indices for concluding whether the alienation was in need for legal necessity as enumeration on what would be legal necessity is unpredictable and would depend upon facts of each case.A joint Hindu family is capable of acting through its Karta or adult member of the family in management of the joint Hindu family property. A coparcener who has right to claim a share in the joint Hindu family estate cannot seek injunction against the Karta restraining him from dealing with or entering into a transaction from sale of the joint Hindu family property, albeit post alienation has a right to challenge the alienation if the same is not for legal necessity or for betterment of the estate. Where a Karta has alienated a joint Hindu family property for value either for legal necessity or benefit of the estate it would bind the interest of all undivided members of the family even when they are minors or widows. There are no specific grounds that establish the existence of legal necessity and the existence of legal necessity depends upon facts of each case. The Karta enjoys wide discretion in his decision over existence of legal necessity and as to in what way such necessity can be fulfilled. The exercise of powers given the rights of the Karta on fulfilling the requirement of legal necessity or betterment of the estate is valid and binding on other coparceners.Omission to frame an issue as required under Order XIV Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 does not vitiate the trial where the parties go to trial fully knowing the rival case and lead evidence in support of their respective contentions and to refute contentions of the other sideCase Number : Civil Appeal No. 7037 of 2021 (Arising Out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 13853 of 2021)Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sanjiv Khanna pronounced the non- reportable judgment of the Bench comprising Hon’ble Mr. Justice M.R. Shah and His Lordship.For Appellant(s) Mr. Rajesh Mahale, AOR For Respondent(s) Ms. T.S. Shanthi, Adv. Mr. Narendra Kumar, AOR