Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation and Development) Act, 1966 (Karnataka) – Section 65 – Levy of market fees – Sale of the imported agricultural produce within the market area after processing – It is not entitled for exemption from payment of market fees.A reading of Section 65 of the Act, which is the charging section, it is clear that, the Market Committee shall levy and collect the market fees from every buyer in respect of agricultural produce bought by such buyer in the market area, at such rate as may be specified in the bye-laws. As per the second proviso to Section 65(2) of the Act, if on any agricultural produce market fee has already been levied and collected under sub-Section (2) in any market area within the State and such agricultural produce is processed and sold in any other market area within the State or exported outside the State, it shall be exempted from the levy of market fee. However, a reading of the explanation, makes it clear, the applicability of second proviso excluded to any agricultural produce imported from outside the State and processed and sold in any market area within the State; or any other agricultural produce imported or caused to be imported by any person either on his own account or as an agent for another person, from outside the State into any market area within the State for the purpose of processing or manufacturing except for one’s own domestic consumption. Further, as per Section (2-A)(ia), if the produce is sold by an importer to the purchaser, the importer to realise the market fee from the purchaser and shall be liable to pay the same to the committee. A harmonious reading of the Section 65(2) of the Act, its second proviso, and explanation to the same and clause (2-A)(ia), makes it clear that if any dealer imports agricultural produce from outside the State into any market area within the State of Karnataka for the purpose of processing and sale, the applicability of second proviso to sub-section (2) of 12 Section 65 of the Act stands excluded. The explanation to sub-section (2) of Section 65 of the Act, makes it clear that even the processed items from the agricultural produce imported from outside the State of Karnataka, attract market fee on sales within the market area of the appellant – Market Committee. It is also clear from the aforesaid Section, it is the obligation of the importer to realise the market fee from the purchaser and pay the same to the Market Committee. [Para 12]If one merely imports notified agricultural produce from outside the State for the purpose of cleaning and processing without selling the processed produce within the market area is not liable to pay market fee.As much as in this case without disputing the factum of sale within the market area post the import, the respondent has defended the proceedings only on the ground that once the agricultural produce is processed it will not attract market fee as such the same cannot be accepted. It is the sale within the market area that attracts levy of market fee, and not the first purchase that was outside the market area. Notably the goods sold are also notified agricultural produce 15 specified in the Schedule. Validity of the item under the Schedule is not under challenge. For the aforesaid reasons, the appeal is allowed.Section 65 of the Act reads as under:“65. Levy of market fees:- (2) The market committee shall levy and collect market fees from every buyer in respect of agricultural produce bought by such buyer in the market area, at such rate as may be specified in the bye-laws which shall not be more than two rupees per one hundred rupees of the value of such produce bought except in case of livestock where the market fee shall not be more than five rupees per head of cattle other than sheep or goat, and in the case of sheep or goat such fee shall not be more than one rupee per head in such manner and at such times as may be specified in the bye-laws:Provided that in the case of any cooperative society doing business in agricultural produce within a market yard, market fee shall be levied and collected at the rate of eighty per cent of the market fee payable under this Act:Provided further that, if on any agricultural produce market fee has already been levied and collected under sub-section (2) in any market area within the State and such agricultural produce is processed and sold in any other market area within the State or exported outside the State it shall be exempted from the levy of market fee:Explanation. – Nothing in this proviso shall apply to –(i) any processed agricultural produce imported from outside the State and sold in any market area within the State; or(ii) any agricultural produce imported or caused to be imported by any person either on his own account or as an agent for another person, from outside the State into any market area within the State for the purpose of processing or manufacturing except for one’s own domestic consumption.Provided also that in case of a buyer in a spot exchange established by a licensee or a licensee for direct purchase of notified agricultural produce or a contract farming sponsor buying from a contract farming producer, market fee shall be levied and collected at the rate of seventy per cent of the market fee payable under this Act:Provided also that in case of any private markets established under Section 72-A of the Act, market fee shall be levied and collected at the rate of thirty three percent of market fee payable under this Act, provided that no market fee is leviable on flowers, fruits and vegetables. Instead the Market committee may collect user charges in respect of the above articles, user charges for such services provided by the Market Committee from the buyer of the produce at such rates as may be specified in the bye-laws as approved by the Director of Agricultural Marketing.(2-A) The market fee payable under this section shall be realised as follows namely.-(i) if the produce is sold through a commission agent, the commission agent shall realise the market fee from the purchaser and shall be liable to pay the same to the committee;(ia) if the produce is sold by an importer to the purchaser, the importer shall realise the market fee from the purchaser and shall be liable to pay the same to the committee;(ii) if the produce is purchased directly by a trader from a producer the trader shall be liable to pay the market fee to the committee;(iii) if the produce is purchased by a trader from another trader, the trader selling the produce shall realise it from the purchaser and shall be liable to pay the market fee to the committee; and(iv) in any other case of sale of such produce, the purchaser shall be liable to pay the market fee to the committee.(2-B) The market fee payable under clause (i), (ia), (ii) or (iii) of subsection (2-A) shall be paid to the market committee within such time as may be specified in the bye-laws.Case Number : C.A. No. 7706 of 2021 (Arising out of Special Leave Petition(C) No.18761 of 2013); December 14, 2021. (Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 11-01-2013 in WA No. 18000/2011 passed by the High Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru)Hon’ble Mr. Justice R. Subhash Reddy pronounced the Reportable Judgment of the Bench comprising His Lordship and Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sanjiv Khanna.For Petitioner(s) Dr. Nanda Kishore, AOR For Respondent(s) Mr. Haris Beeran, Adv. Mr. Mushtaq Salim, Adv. Mr. Usman Ghani Khan, Adv. Mr. Azhar Assees, Adv. Mr. Radha Shyam Jena, AOR