Evidence Act, 1872 – S. 27 – Attempts to put a burden on the accused, which does not shift unless prosecution has proved the case beyond reasonable doubt.To say the least, we are shocked at the finding. The narration makes for an interesting reading as a story. However, all the observations are nothing but conjectures and surmises, without there being any evidentiary support to them. It is really surprising, as to how the Additional Sessions Judge could have dealt with the present case in such a casual manner when he was considering the question of life and death of four accused. We are amazed by the manner in which the High court has dealt with the present matter. Another finding of the High Court, which makes for an interesting reading and is foreign to criminal jurisprudence. Further, it can be seen that, the very same Judges of the High Court refused to believe the very same evidence of prosecution witnesses in respect of other accused. The High Court further goes on to have an academic discussion with regard to the possibility, preponderance of probability, a scientist conducting his experiments with great care, choosing between two or more possibilities, and preponderates of one over the other, etc. The law, however, that is fully settled, is that, it is the duty of the prosecution to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt. [Paras 74 – 81]Criminal Law – Golden principle to be followed in criminal jurisprudence – It is the duty of the prosecution to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt.A criminal trial is not like a fairy tale wherein one is free to give flight to one’s imagination and phantasy. It concerns itself with the question as to whether the accused arraigned at the trial is guilty of the crime with which he is charged. Crime is an event in real life and is the product of interplay of different human emotions. In arriving at the conclusion about the guilt of the accused charged with the commission of a crime, the court has to judge the evidence by the yardstick of probabilities, its intrinsic worth and the animus of witnesses. Every case in the final analysis would have to depend upon its own facts. Although the benefit of every reasonable doubt should be given to the accused, the courts should not at the same time reject evidence which is ex facie trustworthy on grounds which are fanciful or in the nature of conjectures.Evidence law – Independent Witnesses – A large number of villagers had gathered at the spot after the incident. However, none of the independent witnesses have been examined by the prosecution. Since the witnesses examined on behalf of the prosecution are interested witnesses, non­examination of independent witnesses, though available, would make the prosecution version doubtful. [Para 67]Evidence law – Expert Report – fingerprints – dog squad – though fingerprints were taken at the spot, the fingerprint expert’s report is not placed on record – Report of the dog squad is also not placed on record – the said also casts a doubt with regard to the genuineness of the prosecution case. [Para 68]Arrest-Cum-Recovery Memo – Since no public witness has been examined to support the memo, the statement made therein will have to be scrutinised with greater caution and circumspection.Motive – In case of direct evidence and the ocular testimony of the eye­witness being found to be trustworthy, reliable and cogent, it will not be necessary for the prosecution to prove the motive for the crime.It is well settled that the evidence of interested or inimical witnesses is to be scrutinised with care but cannot be rejected merely on the ground of being a partisan evidence. If on a perusal of the evidence the court is satisfied that the evidence is credit­worthy there is no bar in the Court relying on the said evidence.It is a sound and well­-established rule of law that the court is concerned with the quality and not with the quantity of the evidence necessary for proving or disproving a fact. Generally speaking, oral testimony in this context may be classified into three categories, namely:In the first category of proof, the court should have no difficulty in coming to its conclusion either way — it may convict or may acquit on the testimony of a single witness, if it is found to be above reproach or suspicion of interestedness, incompetence or subornation. In the second category, the court equally has no difficulty in coming to its conclusion. It is in the third category of cases, that the court has to be circumspect and has to look for corroboration in material particulars by reliable testimony, direct or circumstantial.Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – Section 313 – Only after the prosecution discharges its burden of proving the case beyond reasonable doubt, the burden would shift on the accused. [Para 71]The burden lies on the prosecution to prove the allegations beyond all reasonable doubt. In contradistinction to the same, the accused has only to create a doubt about the prosecution case and the probability of its defence. An accused is not required to establish or prove his defence beyond all reasonable doubt, unlike the prosecution. If the accused takes a defence, which is not improbable and appears likely, there is material in support of such defence, the accused is not required to prove anything further. The benefit of doubt must follow unless the prosecution is able to prove its case beyond all reasonable doubt. The fact that a defence may not have been taken by an accused under Section 313 CrPC again cannot absolve the prosecution from proving its case beyond all reasonable doubt. If there are materials which the prosecution is unable to answer, the weakness in the defence taken cannot become the strength of the prosecution to claim that in the circumstances it was not required to prove anything. When the prosecution is not able to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt it cannot take advantage of the fact that the accused have not been able to probabilise their defence. It is well settled that the prosecution must stand or fall on its own feet. It cannot draw support from the weakness of the case of the accused, if it has not proved its case beyond reasonable doubt.Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – S. 366 (1) – Penal Code, 1860 – Ss. 302/34 – Arms Act, 1878 – Ss. 25/4 – Murder – Dispute over the management of the brick­-kiln -Reference for confirmation of the death sentence – Arrest of the accused immediately after the incident – Recovery of the weapons alleged to have been used in the crime at the instance of the accused – Recovery of the bloodstained clothes alleged to have been worn by the accused while committing the crime – Motive – Inconsistencies and lacunae in the prosecution case.The prosecution has failed to bring home the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt, we are at pains to observe the manner in which the present case has been dealt with by the trial court as well as by the High Court, particularly, when the trial court awarded death penalty to the accused and the High Court confirmed it. The trial court and the High Court were expected to exercise a greater degree of scrutiny, care and circumspection while directing the accused to be hanged till death. The prosecution has utterly failed to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt. The conviction and death sentence imposed on the accused is totally unsustainable in law.Case Number : Criminal Appeal No.434­-436 of 2020 with Criminal Appeal No.442 of 2020, Criminal Appeal No.437­439 of 2020, Criminal Appeal No. 440-­441 of 2020Hon’ble Mr.Justice B.R.Gavai pronounced the judgment of the Bench comprising Hon’ble Mr.Justice L.Nageswara Rao, His Lordship and Hon’ble Mrs.Justice B.V.Nagarathna.For Appellant(s) Ms. Sweta Rani, AOR Mr. Anant Agarwal, Adv. Mr. Ankit Kumar Lal, AOR Mr. Ashish Virmani, AOR For Respondent(s) Mr. Vinod Diwakar, AAG Mr. Sarvesh Singh Baghel,AOR Mr. Rajan Kumar Chourasia, Adv Mr. Upendra Mishra, Adv Mr. Rajendra Kumar Singh, Adv Ms. Arpika Singhal, Adv Mr. B.N. Dubey, Adv Mr. Sarvesh Singh Baghel, AOR Mr. Nitya Ramakrishnan, Sr. Adv Mr. Prasanna S., AOR Mr. Vibhor Jain, Adv. Ms. Vinoothna Vinjam, Adv. Mr. Yuvraj Singh Rathore, Adv.