Calcutta High CourtPronati Mitra vs Sachindra Nath Chatterjee on 7 September, 1977Equivalent citations: AIR 1977 Cal 409Author: N MukherjiBench: N MukherjiJUDGMENT N.C. Mukherji, J.1. This appeal is directed against the judgment and decree dated 30th January 1968 passed by Sri P.K. Banerjee, Additional District Judge, 7th Court at Alipore in Title Appeal No. 1000 of 1967affirming those dated 4th May, 1967 passed by Sri R. K. Ghatak, Munsif, 2nd Court at Sealdah inTitle Suit No. 483 of 1963.2. The plaintiff filed the suit on the ground that she requires the suit premises for her own personaluse and occupation. The defendant contested the suit3. The learned Munsif found that the plaintiff failed to prove that she requires the said premises forher own use and occupation. In that view of his finding the suit was dismissed. The plaintiffpreferred an appeal before the learned Additional District Judge and the learned Additional DistrictJudge dismissed the appeal. Being aggrieved, the present appeal has been filed.4. During the pendency of this appeal on September 20, 1976 an application was filed foramendment of the plaint which became necessary in view of the decision of B. Banerjee v. Anita Pan,. The application was allowed and paragraph 6-A was incorporated in the plaint. Additional issueswere also framed. Another application was filed on 9th of August 1977 for further amendment of theplaint for the purpose of taking into consideration some subsequent events which happened duringthe pendency of the second appeal. This application is very much opposed by the respondent. In thisapplication it is stated that in the month of June 1976 the petitioner has come to know that in theyear 1974 during the pendency of the second appeal the opposite party has sublet a portion of thesuit premises to one Satyendra Kumar Roy, who is running a business there named and styled as"M/s. Innervias View X-Ray & Electro Therapy" and has taken out a trade licence from the CalcuttaCorporation for running the said business in the suit premises. The petitioner states that the saidsubletting was done without the knowledge and prior consent of the petitioner and as such theopposite party has disentitled himself to the protection of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Actand rendered himself liable to ejectment. It has further been stated that in the interest of justice andin order to shorten the litigation and avoid multiplicity of proceedings it is necessary for thepetitioner that the plaint should be amended by inserting two new paragraphs therein alterparagraph No. 6-A. Those new paragraphs have been numbered as 7-A and 7-B in the petition.Previously a similar application was filed and while disposing of the application on July 7, 1977 itwas stated that the other application will be considered at the time of hearing of the appeal. The saidapplication was opposed by the respondent and an affidavit of the respondent dated 2nd February1977 and an affidavit of S. K. Roy dated 1st of March 1977 were filed: In those affidavits the story ofsubletting has been completely denied. It is not now necessary for me to decide whether in fact therespondent sublet the premises as alleged by the appellant. I am only required to consider whethersuch an application for taking into consideration the subsequent events of subletting can be allowedPronati Mitra vs Sachindra Nath Chatterjee on 7 September, 1977Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/988638/1at this stage.5. Mr. Promotha Nath Mitter, learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant, in support ofhis contention first refers to a decision (Tinkari Das v. Jamuna Bala Dasi). In this case it was a suitfor recovery of possession of leased property on eviction of tenant on the ground of forfeiture ofproperty. It was held that the Court could allow the amendment to add the additional ground ofdetermination of lease by efflux of time. It was further held that for shortening the litigation and forends of justice the Court is entitled to take into consideration the subsequent events even if therewas a change in the ground of eviction where the nature and character of suit, which was forrecovery of possession of the suit property on eviction of the defendant was not in any way affected.6. Mr. Ranjit Kumar Banerjee, learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the respondent, submitsthat the facts of this case are completely different. Here forfeiture of property by efflux of time couldnot be disputed by the defendant and as such the Court could take notice of such an event. But thecase will be different where the alleged subsequent event is very much challenged by the other side.7. The next case relied on by Mr. Mitter has been (Ayesha Khatoon v. Durga Sahaya). It is a Benchdecision and their Lordships laid down the same principle as in the case referred to above. Mr.Mitter very much relies on a decision reported in (1977) 4 Cal HC (N) 394 (Dr. R. D. Anklesaria v.Mrs. Kamala Roy). This was a suit for ejectment under West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act on theground of building and rebuilding. During the pendency of the suit the plaintiff made an applicationfor amendment of the plaint by inserting other grounds. e. g. sub-letting, using the premises for apurpose other than residential for which it was let out. The application for amendment was allowed.The defendant came up to this Court challenging the order on the ground that the proposedamendments would change the cause of action and nature of the suit and the subsequent eventscould not be permitted to be introduced, if such introduction results in changing the nature andcharacter of the suit or the cause of action on which the suit is based. Their Lordships afterconsidering several decisions held that "under the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act a tenantwhose contractual tenancy had been determined by a valid notice to quit but against whom nodecree for eviction has been passed remains a tenant under the Premises Tenancy Act. Consequentlya statuory tenant who continues to be the tenant under the Premises Tenancy Act because of specialdefinition of the tenant is liable to be evicted under the said Act if he commits any illegal act ofsubletting and/or wrongful user of the suit premises within the meaning of Section 13 of thePremises Tenancy Act. In this context, a tenant governed by the Transfer of Property Act simpliciterand a tenant governed by the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act stand on altogether differentfooting. In the former case, after the determination of the contractual tenancy the tenant ceases tobe a tenant any further; as such raising of unauthorised structure by such person cannot attract theprovisions of Section 108 of the Transfer of Property Act and no suit for eviction of a tenant for suchwrongful act can be filed. But in the case of a statutory tenant under the West Bengal Premises Act,an act of sub-letting attracts the provisions of Section 13 of the Premises Tenancy Act and suchtenant is liable to be evicted on the ground of subletting even if such sub-letting is made after thedetermination of contractual tenancy. Accordingly, the nature and character of ihe suit namely thesuit for eviction of a tenant is not changed in the case of a tenant governed by the Premises TenancyAct". It was further held that "In the circumstances of the case, the Court cannot ignore thePronati Mitra vs Sachindra Nath Chatterjee on 7 September, 1977Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/988638/2subsequent events on the statutory principle of avoiding multiplicity of legal proceedings,shortening the course of litigation and achieving the ends of justice."8. Mr. Mitter next refers to a decision (Sikharchand Jain v. Digamber Jain Praband Karini Sabha). Itwas held that "Ordinarily, a suit is tried in all its stages on the cause of action as it existed on thedate of its institution. But it is open to a Court (including a court of appeal) to take notice of eventswhich have happened after the institution of the suit and afford relief to the parties in the changedcircumstances to do complete justice between the parties and to shorten litigation."9. Mr. Mitter also refers to a decision (Pasuputeti Venkateswarlu v. The Motor & General Traders).It was held that "Where during the pendency of a proceeding under Rent Control Legislation by thelandlord for permission to evict the tenants, a subsequent event in the facts of the case takes placewhich has a material bearing on the landlord's right to evict, the approach of the High Court inrevision, in taking cognizance of the new development cannot be said to be wrong or illegal". Mr.Mitter submits that if this amendment be allowed then it will not in any way change the cause ofaction. The suit was brought for eviction by determining the tenancy after serving notice accordingto law. It was not necessary for the landlord to state the grounds of eviction in the notice forejectment. The cause of action for the suit will remain unchanged and that being so, in order toshorten litigation and for doing justice the amendment must be allowed.10. Mr. Banerjee contends that a subsequent event which is admitted can be taken intoconsideration by the court, but a fact which is very much challenged should not be allowed to beadded by the plaintiff. The proposed amendment will change the nature of the suit completely. Thesuit is one for reasonable requirement, that having failed the plaintiff now cannot add a ground inthe plaint which is said to have taken long after the institution of the suit and long after the decreesof the courts below were passed. Mr. Banerjee in support of his contention refers to severaldecisions. He first cites to a decision reported in 20 Cal WN 1099: (AIR 1917 Cal 716) (Nuri Mian v.Ambica Singh). It was held : "The decree in a suit should ordinarily conform to the rights of theparties as they stood at the date of its institution. But there are cases when it is incumbent upon aCourt of Justice to take notice of events which have happened since the institution of the suit and tomould its decree according to the circumstances as they stand at the time the decree is made. Thisprinciple will be applied where it is shown that the original relief claimed has, by reason ofsubsequent change of circumstances, become inappropriate or that it is necessary to base thedecision of the Court on the altered circumstances in order to shorten litigation or to do completejustice between the parties". The same principle has been laid down in (1907) 6 Cal LJ 74 (RamRatan Sahu v. Mohant Sahu), 20 Cal LJ 107 : (AIR 1915 Cal 103) (Rai Charan Mandal v. Biswa NathMandal) and 34 Cal WN 634 : (AIR 1931 Cal 45) (Sm. Balak Bala Dassi v. Jadu Nath Das) cited byMr. Banerjee. I do not see how the principles of law enunciated in the above cases support Mr.Banerjee's contention.11. Mr. Banerjee next relies on a decision (S. Rajagopal v. C. M. Armugam). In this case before theSupreme Court request was put forward during the hearing of the appeal to direct the production ofa batismal register. Their Lordships were of opinion that there was no justification under Order 41,Rule 27 of the Code for summoning it at this stage, particularly because even if that register isPronati Mitra vs Sachindra Nath Chatterjee on 7 September, 1977Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/988638/3brought, a lot of oral evidence would have to be recorded in order to have the register properlyproved and to give an opportunity to the party, against whom inferences follow from it, to meetthose inferences. In the circumstances, the prayer was refused. Mr. Banerjee submits that in thiscase also if the amendment be allowed then the case will have to be heard afresh and new evidencewill have to be adduced. If the plaintiff's allegation is correct that the defendant has sublet withoutthe consent of the plaintiff then the plaintiff can very well bring a fresh suit for ejectment. Mr. Mitterjoins issue and contends that there is absolutely no reason why the plaintiff will be compelled tobring another suit if the matter can be decided in this suit and that would avoid multiplicity ofproceedings, shorten litigation and would meet ends of justice.12. Mr. Banerjee next relies on a decision reported in ILR (1969) 1 Cal 582 (S. B. Sen v. TejendraChandra Bhowmik). In this case it was held: "Sub-letting need not subsist till the date of institutionof the suit, it is sufficient if the fact of sub-letting without the written consent of the landlord isproved". It was further held: "Sub-letting was found concurrently by the Courts below which cannotbe interfered with in a second appeal". Mr. Banerjee submits that the question whether the plaintiffreasonably requires the premises or not has been concurrently found by the courts below against theplaintiff and that being so, that question cannot be made in this appeal. As has already been statedat the present moment I am not hearing the appeal on merits. I am now dealing with the applicationfiled by the plaintiff for further amendment of the plaint seeking to add a ground of subletting.Mr. Banerjee also relies on a Special Bench decision (Surya Properties Private Ltd. v. BimalenduNath Sarkar). It has been held in this case that "It is not necessary to mention in a notice underSection 13(6) the ground or grounds of ejectment for which a suit is to be instituted for recovery ofpossession. There is, however, nothing to prevent the landlord from setting out such grounds in thenotice. The notice, however, will not be a notice of such grounds". This case without helping Mr.Banerjee rather helps Mr. Mitter. A tenancy is determined by serving a notice under Section 13 (6)read with Section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act and as soon as a tenancy is determined, thecause of action for the suit arises, it has been clearly laid down that it is not necessary to state thegrounds of ejectment in the notice. In such circumstances, if any ground is added subsequently thatcannot change the cause of action or the nature of the suit. The suit remains one for eviction as itwas at the date of commencement of the suit. Taking into consideration the principles of lawenunciated in the decisions referred to above I am of opinion that in the facto and circumstances ofthe present case the Court is not prevented even in a second appeal to take into consideration thefact of sub-letting which, according to the plaintiff, has taken place during the pendency of theappeal. I, therefore, allow the application filed by the appellant on 9-8-77.13. The paragraphs marked as 7-A and 7-B in paragraph 7 of the petition be added in the plaint asparagraphs 6-B and 6-C. The plaintiff will have to prove the fact of sub-letting by adducing evidence,The defendant may also adduce evidence to disprove the fact. The plaintiff is also required to adduceevidence for the amendment which has already been allowed on her application dated 20thSeptember 1976. For the purpose of adducing fresh evidence I think that the case should be sentback to the learned Munsif. The appeal is kept pending. Let the records go down to the learnedMunsif who will give the plaintiff an opportunity to adduce fresh evidence on the question whetherthe plaintiff has any other reasonably suitable accommodation in Calcutta besides the suit premisesPronati Mitra vs Sachindra Nath Chatterjee on 7 September, 1977Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/988638/4and whether the defendant in 1974 has sublet a portion of the suit premises to one Satyendra KumarRoy. The defendant will also be permitted to challenge these facts by adducing evidence. Afterrecording such evidence as may be adduced by the parties the learned Munsif will send the same tothis Court. As the matter is pending for a long time, the learned Munsif is requested to send thereport as early as possible.Pronati Mitra vs Sachindra Nath Chatterjee on 7 September, 1977Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/988638/5