Land Acquisition Act, 1894 – Section 48 – Completion of acquisition not compulsory, but compensation to be awarded when not completed – What is provided in Section 48(1) is the power / liberty to withdraw from acquisition. It is an administrative act.A proceeding under section 48(1) of the Land Acquisition Act is administrative in nature as can be seen from the language employed. Section 48 of the Act reads as follows:48. Completion of acquisition not compulsory, but compensation to be awarded when not completed. –(1) Except in the case provided for in section 36, the Government shall be at liberty to withdraw from the acquisition of any land of which possession has not been taken.(2) Whenever the Government withdraws from any such acquisition, the Collector shall determine the amount of compensation due for the damage suffered by the owner in consequence of the notice or of any proceedings there under, and shall pay such amount to the person interested, together with all costs reasonably incurred by him in the prosecution of the proceedings under this Act relating to the said land.(3) The provision of Part III of this Act shall apply, so far as may be, to the determination of the compensation payable under this section.”Land Acquisition Act, 1894 – Section 48 (1) – A notification under Section 48(1) does not warrant any notice or opportunity of hearing, to the original land owners.While a Notification for acquisition issued under Section 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act seeks to take away an individual’s right to property, a Notification under Section 48(1) is actually the reverse or opposite. It confers benefit upon an individual and hence it is not supposed to be preceded by any enquiry. The essence of an order which is quasi­judicial in nature is that it is preceded by an opportunity of hearing to the party affected thereby.General Clauses Act, 1897 – Section 21 – the power to issue Notification would include a power to rescind the Notification.The enquiry conducted by the Housing Commissioner has revealed that the land mafia has taken over the land. It is trite to point out that an order secured by fraud and misrepresentation will not confer any vested right and that, therefore, the land owners cannot pitch their claim either on the basis of vesting or on the basis of Article 300A.For Appellant(s) Mr. Vishwajit Singh, AOR For Respondent(s) Mr. Krishanam Mishra, Adv. Mr. Param Kumar Mishra, Adv. Ms. Sharmila Upadhyay, AOR Mr. Anand Varma, AORHon’ble Mr. Justice V. Ramasubramanian pronounced the reportable Judgment of the Bench comprising Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hemant Gupta and His Lordship.