Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 – S. 96, O. XLI R. 31 – There cannot be an automatic allowing of the appeal and quashing and setting aside the judgment and decree passed by the trial court without any further entering into the merits of the appeal and/or expressing anything on merits in the appeal on an impleadment of a party in an appeal.The High Court by the impugned order without assigning any reasons as to why the proposed respondents have to be impleaded in the first appeal, allowed the said application and directed to implead A.P. Transco as party to the appeal as well as to the original suit. Not only that, while allowing the said application for impleadment, thereafter, without further entering into the merits and/or expressing anything on merits and solely on the ground that as the application for impleadment was allowed, the High Court set aside the judgment and decree passed by the trial court and remanded the matter to the trial court with a direction to the trial court to decide the suit afresh after affording an opportunity to the impleaded party to lead evidence in the suit.This is not the manner in which the High Court was required to deal with the first appeal arising out of the judgment and decree passed by the trial court. Nothing has been observed and/or decided on merits. Even no reasoning has been given why the A.P. Transco was required to be impleaded as a party to the appeal. The High Court has not only directed to implead the A.P. Transco as party to the appeal but has also directed to implead the A.P. Transco in the original suit also. It is required to be noted that as such the suit was filed by the appellant – original plaintiff and as per the settled proposition of law, the plaintiff is the dominus litis. No issue was raised before the trial court on nonjoinder of parties. Therefore, as such whether in the appeal preferred by the original defendants against the judgment and decree passed by the trial court, such an application would be maintainable or not, that itself is a question, which was required to be first considered and decided by the High Court.Without framing points for determination and considering both facts and law; without proper discussion and assigning the reasons, the First Appellate Court cannot dispose of the first appeal under Section 96 CPC and that too without raising the points for determination as provided under Order XLI Rule 31 CPC.Hon’ble Mr. Justice M.R. Shah pronounced the reportable judgment of the Bench comprising His Lordship and Hon’ble Mrs. Justice B.V. Nagarathna.For Appellant(s) Mr. Vishnu Shankar Jain, AOR For Respondent(s) Ms. Mahalakshmi Pavani, Sr. Adv. Mr. G. Balaji, AOR