Consumer Protection Act 1986 – Section 13 (2) – Delay in filing Written Statement – the Constitution Bench on 4 March 2020 held that the consumer fora has no power and/or jurisdiction to accept the written statement beyond the statutory period prescribed under the Act, i.e., 45 days in all – the Constitution Bench judgment would not affect applications that were pending or decided before 4 March 2020.A similar principle is inherent in the decision of the Constitution Bench in New India Assurance Company Ltd. (supra). However, given the conflicting decisions concerning the nature of such discretion, the Constitution Bench considered it appropriate to give prospective effect to the decision. It did not make a distinction between applications for condonation which had been decided and those which were pending on the date of the decision. Thus, the decision in Daddy’s Builders (supra) would not affect applications that were pending or decided before 4 March 2020. Such applications for condonation would be entitled to the benefit of the position in Reliance General Insurance Company Limited (supra) which directed consumer fora to render a decision on merits. We have expounded on the above principles in order to adopt a bright-line standard which obviates uncertainty on the legal position before the consumer fora and obviates further litigation.In the present case, before the decision of the Constitution Bench, the delay was condoned by the NCDRC by furnishing reasons for the exercise of such discretion. Having regard to the prospective effect of the judgment of the Constitution Bench in New India Assurance Company Limited (supra) and the orders of this Court in Reliance General Insurance Company Limited (supra) and Bhasin Infotech-2018 (supra), which had recognized an element of discretion pending the reference, we are of the considered view that no case for interference is made in the order of the NCDRC allowing the application for condonation of delay on merits.Hon’ble Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud pronounced the judgment of the Bench comprising His Lordship, Hon’ble Mr Justice Surya Kant and Hon’ble Mr Justice Vikram Nath.For Appellant(s) Mr. Salil Paul, Adv. Mr. Sahil Paul, Adv. Ms. Manjeet Chawla, AOR For Respondent(s) Mr. Amit Kumar Singh, AOR Mrs. K. Enatoli Sema, Adv. Ms. Chubalemla Chang, Adv.