The Division Bench of the High Court, while reversing the Order of the trial Court, pointed out: (i) that the predecessor of the respondentplaintiff was issued a certificate under Exhibit P­21 dated 16.12.1975 under Section 38­E of the Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Tenancy 6 and Agricultural Lands Act, 1950; (ii) that the said certificate is proof enough to show the passing of title in favour of the predecessor of the respondent­plaintiff; (iii) that Exhibit P­17, which is Form 1­B (Record of Rights) showed that prima facie the respondent was in possession of the land on the date of institution of the suit; and (iv) that therefore, the person in possession was entitled to an interim order of protection.The respondent herein filed a suit (i) for a declaration that he is the absolute owner in possession and enjoyment of the suit schedule property; (ii) for a further declaration that the Gift Settlement Deed dated 24.07.1987 executed in favour of the petitioner herein was null and void; and (iii) for a permanent injunction restraining the petitioner herein from interfering with his possession and enjoyment. Pending suit the respondent also moved an interlocutory application for an interim order of injunction restraining the petitioner herein from interfering with his peaceful enjoyment and possession of the suit property. By an Order dated 11.02.2020, the trial Court dismissed the application for injunction. Challenging the said order of dismissal, the respondent filed an appeal under Order XLIII, Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure. By an Order dated 2.06.2021, the High Court for the State of Telangana at Hyderabad allowed the appeal and granted an interim order of injunction in favour of the respondent, pending disposal of the suit. It is against the said order that the defendant in the suit has come up with the present special leave petition. The impugned order of the High Court does not warrant any interference under Article 136 of the Constitution. Hence, this Special Leave Petition is dismissed.Hon’ble Mr. Justice V. Ramasubramanian pronounced the reportable Judgment of the Bench comprising Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hemant Gupta and His Lordship.For Petitioner(s) Mr. Somanadri Goud Katam, AOR Mr. Sudipto Sircar, Adv. Mr. Ponnam Mahesh Babu, Adv. For Respondent(s) Mr. D. Ramakrishna Reddy, Adv. Mr. S. Arif Ali Zaidi, Adv. Mrs. D. Bharathi Reddy, AOR