Delhi High CourtMunicipal Corporation Of Delhi vs Sri Ram on 24 January, 1975Equivalent citations: 1975 CriLJ 1071, ILR 1975 Delhi 764, 1975 RLR 256Author: M JoshiBench: P Safeer, M S JoshiJUDGMENT M.S. Joshi, J.(1) This appeal arises from the judgment of Shri C. D. Sharma, Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, Delhidated 29-10-69 whereby Shri Ram respondent was acquitted of the charge under Section 7/16 ofprevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 framed against him on account of the complaint filed bythe Municipal Corporation of Delhi.(2) Sri Ram had a shop where milk and curd were sold in Gali Bahuji, Pahari Dhiraj, Delhi. Shri V.N. Sharma, a Food Inspector visited that shop at 7.00 A.M. on 19th April, 1969 and purchased fromSri Ram 660 MI. of Cow's milk for purposes of analysis against payment of 90 P., the price of thesaid quantity of milk. The sample of milk so purchased was divided into three equal parts and put inthree clean and dry bottles which were properly sealed after addition of the requisite 18 drops offormalin per bottle. One of the three sealed bottles was given to Siri Ram and another was deliveredto the Public Analyst for test. The milk sold by the shopkeeper was claimed by him to be cow's milkand it was required, accordingly to the standards laid down by the Prevention of Food AdulterationRules, 1955, to contain not Jess than 3.5 per cent milk fat and not less than 8.5 per cent milk solidnot fat. The Public Analyst, however, found that although the fat content of the milk was 5 per cent,the other solid was only 7.14 per cent. The deficiency in the non-fat solid spelt out 16 per centadulteration. In that context a complaint was lodged by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi againstthe vendor of the milk, Siri Ram.(3) The learned Magistrate who tried and disposed of the complaint was of the view that since thetotal solids found in the sample were more than the prescribed minimum of 12 per cent, the fatcontent being much in excess of the prescribed minimum i.e. 3.5 per cent, it was quite probable thatthe Public Analyst was not able to isolate the fat contents so successfully as to have left no scope forslight variation as found in the sample and proceeding of this presumption gave the accused benefitof doubt and acquitted him.(4) The learned counsel appearing for the Municipal Corporation of Delhi has urged before thisCourt that the reasoning adopted by the learned magistrate was inherently faulty and his reliance onSupreme Court's decision in Malwa Co-operative Milk Union Ltd.. Indore and others Vs. Biharilaland another, since reported as 1973 Food Adulteration Cases 375, was misconceived. It is to beborne in mind that according to Siri Ram's own showing the milk which he sold was cow's milk andthis type of milk, if sold in Delhi, must contain as per item A. 11.01.11 in appendix B of thePrevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955, 3.5 percent minimum percent milk fat and 8.5minimum per cent milk solid not fat. This standard of quality laid down by the Central Governmentin excerise of its powers under clause (b) sub-section (1) of Section 23 of the Prevention of FoodAdulteration Act, 1954 in consultation with the Central Committee for Food Standards constitutedunder Section 3 of the said Act prescribes the minimum percentage of milk fat and milk solid not fatMunicipal Corporation Of Delhi vs Sri Ram on 24 January, 1975Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1269671/1independently of each other and compensation of deficiency in one constituent by excess of theother is not contemplated. Otherwise it would have sufficed to specify the total minimum solidcontent of a variety of milk, and mention of the two types of solid would not have been necessary. Indetermining whether a disputed sample of milk is or is not up to the mark, the courts have to look tothe statutory standards set down by the Rules and not to improvise any rough and ready standardsof their own. If this approach is not adopted not only the opinion of the Public Analyst will lose itsvalue, the provision in section 13(2) for analysis by the Central Food Laboratory will also becomemore or less redundant. The learned trial magistrate purported to act in the light of MalwaCo-operative Milk Union case but he failed to note that the circumstances prevailing in that casewere entirely different from those of the one in hand. There the complaints in question had arisenfrom two samples of buffalo milk examined by the Public Analyst of Indore. One of them contained6 per cent milk fat and 7.9 per cent solids non-fat, and the other 5.9 per cent milk fat and 7.7 percent solids non-fat whereas the requirement of the Rules was 5 per cent milk fat and 9 per cent milksolids other than milk fat. In the one case the deficiency in total solids was. I per cent and in thesecond 4 per cent. The Supreme Court observed that this was border-line variation and it was notclear whether the Public Analyst was able to isolate the fat content so successfully as not to have leftroom for this slight variation. The fact of the variation of the contents of the sample from theprescribed standards was, thus, though taken into account but what actually weighed with the Courtwas the propriety of the exercise of its powers by the High Court in revision to set-aside a acquittalsin such like cases. In the words of their Lordships :-"the prosecution was launched against aco-operative society registered as a joint stock company which was carrying on the function ofprocuring and supplying milk in Indore City on a very large scale- It was not interested in making aprofit but in organising the milk supply to a big city. No doubt, it was assisted by highly qualifiedpersonnel and probably by first rate machinery. The argument of Mr. D. P. Singh that in thesecircumstances one would expect near perfection in the milk, may be accepted. But that does notprove that near perfection must be accepted in the work of the analyst when the differrent fromstandard is only .1 per cent in one case and .4 per cent in the other. It is possible that a slight error incalculation or in isolation of fat might have been made. But without speculating upon this aspect ofthe case, it is quite clear to us that this was hardly the kind of case in which the High Court shouldhave exercised its powers to set aside in revision an acquittal, and determination of these andseveral other Pacts in issue, but on the withdrawal of the case by the Public Prosecutor at theinstance of the Corporation and possibly of Government. The State Government apparently thoughtthat was not a case in which the Union should be subjected to a prosecution at the start of itsventures for an almost nominal variation in the contents of milk. The learned Single Judge failed tonotice that the revision applications were rejected by the Sessions Judge for very adequate groundsand that the revision applications themselves had proceeded from a stranger who, as a rival, wasinterested in setting that some obstruction to the work of the Union would result." It is clear that theSupreme Court took the acquittal in his case to be such as should have been allowed to stand and theview taken was that the High Court was not justified in exercising its extraordinary powers ofrevision to set it aside. Here not only the facts are of a different complexion, we arc dealing with anappeal u/s 417 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, and our sphere of powers is notcircumscribed in the manner a court's is when it is hearing a revision petitionagainst acquittal U/s439 of the same Code.Municipal Corporation Of Delhi vs Sri Ram on 24 January, 1975Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1269671/2(5) Unfortunately it was not present to the mind of the learned Trial Magistrate that in MalwaCo-operative Milk Union case the samples were of buffalo milk. This buffalo milk was expected tocontain not less than 5 per cent of milk fat and the fat content of the two samples in fact was 6 percent and 5.9 per cent respectively. Had the milk been adulterated it would have been found deficientnot only in non-fat solids but in milk fat too. The milk which Siri Ram sold to the Food Inspector hesaid was cow's milk. In reality it might have been buffalo milk adulterated with water so that it couldcome up to the standard for fat (3.5 per cent) and be deficient in non-fat solid as it actually was. Themilk sold must satisfy the requirement of the Rules for milk fat and milk solid not fat separately. If itdocs not do that it must be taken to be adulterated, because it is an article sold by the vendor whichis not of the nature, substance or it demanded by the purchaser and is to his prejudice or is not ofthe nature, substance or quality which it purports or is represented to be or because its quality orpurity fall below the prescribed standard. (Prem Das v. State, ). An expect like a Public Analyst maycommit a mistake in his analysis but the Courts make allowance only for a marginal error. If thedeviation is within the reasonable experimental error the benefit of doubt may be reaped by theaccused but where the deviation in the results from the prescribed standards is large andappreciable, the Court cannot go out of its way to ignore the conclusions arrived at by the expert,and enter the realm of conjectures to fish out an alibit for the accused. The milk sold by Siri Ramshould have had 8.5 minimum per cent milk solid not fat whereas it had 7.14 per cent of it. Thedeficiency was 1.36 per cent which could mean that the milk sold contained about 16 per cent moreof water than it should have had in its natural composition. This cannot be termed a border-linevariation. The deficiency here is really substantial. In Babulal Hargovind Das v. TheState of Gujarat(1972 F.A.C. 18) the Supreme Court upheld the conviction of the accused though the milk sold byhim was deficient in non-fat solids only to the extent of I.I per cent. If the prescribed standard is notattained the statute treats the food article in question. by fiction, as adulterated food though in fact itis not adulterated (M. V. Joshi v. M. U. Shimpi and another, ) . In the case reported in Mela SinghSohan Mal v. The State (A.I.R. 1964 Punjab 332) , the milk was short in milk solids not fa't by .3 percent still it was taken to be adulterated. In Bridges V. Griffin (1952 2K. B. 233) the milk had beensold in the same state in which it come from the cow, it had not been directly tampered with anddespite that the accused was convicted of adulteration because it was deficient in fat. The offence ofadulteration was held proved in A. S. Arunachala Nadar and another v. State (1958 Ii, Mlj 408) 0because the butter contained moisture in excess of the statuory maximum and the defense put up bythe accused that it was impossible to keep the moisture content at or below the statutory level, wasrejected In this context reference may also be made to Municipal Committee, Mandi v. Ran; Lal andanother (1962 (1) Cri. L. J. 150 (6) The learned Trial Magistrate committed a grave error in affordingthe benefit of doubt to Sri Ram in acquitting him. The milk sold by him was positively adulteratedand the variation in percentage of milk solid not fat was large and appreciable leaving no option forthe Court to treat the milk as adulterated. This appeal is consequently accepted and the accusedconvicted under Section 7 read with Section 16 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954. Heis sentenced, in view of the entire facts and circumstances of the case, to pay a fine of Rs. 2000.00 orto suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of six months.Municipal Corporation Of Delhi vs Sri Ram on 24 January, 1975Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1269671/3