Orissa High CourtMaa Dakshinakali Animal Feeds vs State Of Orissa And Ors. on 30 October, 1991Equivalent citations: AIR 1992 Ori 278Author: R PatnaikBench: R Patnaik, A PasayatJUDGMENT R.C. Patnaik, J.1. The petitioner has filed this writ application for a declaration that the decision of the Governmentas conveyed by Annexure-A/3 prohibiting setting up of dairy plants, cattle feeds plants, chillingplants excepting by the Orissa State Co-operative Milk Producers Federation was ultra vires Article19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India and for grant of a mandamus directing opposite parties 1, 2 and5 for issue of licence.2. With a view to setting up of an industry for the purpose of manufacturing animal feeds, thepetitioner after registering herself with the District Industries Centre, Puri, obtained sanction of aloan from the Orissa State Financial Corporation for the infra-structure machinery and entered intoan agreement with the Orissa State Electricity Board for supply of electricity. She made anapplication to the Project Manager, District Industries Centre, Bhubaneswar, for grant of a licencewho, as per Annexure-1 recommended her case to the Director of Veterinary and AnimalHusbandry, Orissa, for grant of licence under the provisions of the Orissa Cattle and Poultry Feed(Regulation) 'Act, 1979. She was informed by the Director (O.P. 3) vide Annexure-2 dated 8-2-90that in view of the restriction imposed by the Government, her case for grant of licence could not beconsidered so long as the restriction imposed by the Government was in force. The petitioner wasassailed the said decision of the Government in this writ application.3. Counter-affidavit has been filed on behalf of the State by opposite party No. 3. He has relied uponthe decision of the Government as conveyed to him as per Annexure-A/3 directing that no agencyexcept the Orissa Co-operative Milk Producers Federation would be granted licence for setting up ofdairy plant, cattle feed plant, chilling plant etc. in the operation flood-II area which includes thedistricts of Cuttack, Puri, Dhenkanal and Keonjhar. By Anne-xure-B/3 the Director was intimatedthat grant of new licences for cattle feed in the aforesaid areas was totally prohibited unless it was infavour of the OMFED/OAIC or Utkal Gomangal Samities. The State Government has not filed anyreturn justifying the decision.4. Mr. Misra, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has placed two contentions before us forconsideration : Firstly, a total prohibition on setting up of cattle feed plant for the purpose ofmanufacturing and carrying on trade in animal feed by an executive order was ultra vires Article19(1)(g) of the Constitution and secondly, the prohibition with a view to creating monopoly in favourof OMFED, OAIC and Utkal Gomangal Samiti not being in favour of a State or Corporation ownedand controlled by the State, it was not protected by Sub-clause (2) of Clause (6) of Article 19.5. The Orissa Cattle and Poultry Feed (Regulation), 1979, as the title itself indicates, is a law toregulate the manufacturing of cattle and poultry feed. The statement of objects and reasons makethe object and purpose of the enactment absolutely clear by stating that because of unscrupulousMaa Dakshinakali Animal Feeds vs State Of Orissa And Ors. on 30 October, 1991Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1370652/1traders engaged in manufacture of low quality of feed at lower cost for quick profit in their business,the diary development programmes and poultry development programmes are getting affected andthe farmers sustain heavy loss due to low production of milk and eggs on account of malnutrition.Hence, it was considered necessary to enact a law "to control the quality of cattle feed and poultryfeed for the benefit of dairy farmers and poultry farmers". The regulations contain provision forgrant of licence and prescribe conditions on fulfilment of which licence may be granted and it alsomakes provision for cancellation or suspension of licence, submission of return by the licencee andprovides that the standard of feed manufactured or processed by a licensee shall be as may beprescribed and no licensee should manufacture any type of feed mentioned in Schedule I unless itconforms to the prescribed standard. It also makes provision for testing of feed and for packing,marking and labelling of the feed and for regulation of sale of feed. It does not contain any provisioncreating a monopoly in favour of any person, nor does it authorise the Government to put anembargo on manufacture of feed in any area or in respect of any person.6. Mr. Misra, therefore, has contended that there being no statutory law authorising theGovernment to impose prohibition on manufacture of cattle feed by establishing a plant for thepurpose, imposition of the embargo by an administrative order/executive decision, infringed Article19(1)(g). He relied upon the case of Mannalal Jain v. State of Assam, AIR 1962 SC 386. He has alsourged that the monopoly created by An-nexure-B/3 not being in favour of the State or State ownedand controlled corporation, as contemplated by Sub-clause (2) of Clause (6) of Article 19, is notsaved by the said Sub-clause. He has relied upon Rasbihari Panda v. State of Orissa, AIR 1969 SC1081 and Hari Chand Sardav. Mizo District Council, AIR 1967 SC 829. He has also urged that whenthe exercise of a fundamental right is prohibited, the burden is on the State to show that therestriction is reasonable and is in public interest. He has relied upon Mohd. Faruk v. State ofMadhya Pradesh, AIR 1970 SC 93.7. The rights guaranteed by Sub-clause (g) bf Article 19(1) are not absolute rights but subject torestrictions contemplated by Clauses (2) to (6). It is clear that the restrictions referred to in theseclauses can be imposed only by law, i.e., statuory law; laws enacted by the legislature and bysubordinate legislation. Without legislative authority, the executive cannot impose any restriction onany of the fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 19(1).In Kharak Singh v. State of U.P., AIR 1963 SC 1295, the vires of Regulation 12(b) of the U.P. PoliceRegulations authorising 'domiciliary visits' was assailed as violative of Articles 19(2) and 21 of theConstitution. In that context, it was observed :".....the only manner in which this violation of the fundamental right can be defended is by justifyingthe impugned action taken by the police under the said regulation by reference to a valid law, i.e., beit a statute, a statutory rule or a statutory regulation....."Since the regulations contained in Chapter XX in which Regulation 236 find place had no statutorybasis but were merely executive or departmental instructions, it was held by the six-Judge Benchthat they were not 'laws' which the State was entitled to make under the relevant Clauses (2) to (6) ofArticle 19 in order to regulate or curtail fundamental rights guaranteed by the several sub-clauses ofMaa Dakshinakali Animal Feeds vs State Of Orissa And Ors. on 30 October, 1991Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1370652/2Article 19(2). In view of the aforesaid authoritative pronouncements and the settled position of law,it is unnecessary for us to refer to other decisions on this aspect. We are of the view that in theabsence of any law authorising the State Government to put a total embargo of executive decisionprohibiting grant of licence for the purpose of manufacturing cattle feed except to persons named inAnnexure-A/3 is violative of Article 19(1)(g).8. In view of the aforesaid, the second contention raised by the petitioner is of academic interest.The Supreme Court in Rasbihari's case (AIR 1969 SC 1081) (supra) observed (at p. 1088 of AIR);".....Validity of the law by which the State assumed the monopoly to trade in a given commodity hasto be judged by the test whether the entire benefit arising therefrom is to ensure to the State, and themonopoly is not used as a cloak for conferring private benefit upon a limited class of persons....."9. But, as we have said, this question did not trouble us since the petitioner has to succeed on thefirst ground itself. We, therefore, declare the decision of the Government as per Annexures-A/3 andB/3 illegitimate and ultra vires Article 19(1)(g). The prohibition without sanction of law affected thepetitioner's rights to carry on trade, a right guaranteed by the Constitution as fundamental right.10. In the result, we quash Annexures-A/3 and B/3, allow the writ application and direct theopposite parties 1, 2 and 3 to consider the petitioner's application for grant of licence in accordancewith the provisions contained in Orissa Act 10 of 1979 and dispose of the same within 6 weeks fromthe date of receipt of this order. There would be no order as to costs.A. Pasayat, J.11. I agree.Maa Dakshinakali Animal Feeds vs State Of Orissa And Ors. on 30 October, 1991Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1370652/3