Bombay High CourtSidramaya Nilkanthayaswami ... vs Danava Shidramappa Deshnur And ... on 30 July, 1953Equivalent citations: AIR 1954 Bom 407, (1954) 56 BOMLR 407, ILR 1954 Bom 717Author: GajendragadkarBench: Gajendragadkar, ChainaniJUDGMENT Gajendragadkar, J.1. This appeal has been referred to a Division Bench by Mr. Justice shah for the reason that it raisesan important question of limitation. The question is whether the plaintiffs' right to recover themortgage amount from the successor-in-title of the mortgagor is barred under Art. 132, LimitationAct. This point has been answered against the plaintiffs by the Courts below relying upon thejudgment of Mr. Justice Lokur in -- 'Dnyanoba Gangaram v. Dattoba Balappa', AIR 1947 Bom 152(A). When this appeal was argued before Mr. Justice Shah, it was urged before Him that thejudgment of Mr. Justice Lokur should be reconsidered in view of the fact that it was apparentlyinconsistent with the decision of the Privy Council in -- 'Lasa Din v. Gulab Kunwar (BJ. That is whyMr. Justice Shah has sent this matter to a Division Bench for disposal.2. The facts on which the point of limitation arises can be very briefly stated at the outset. Theproperty in suit originally belonged to one Shidra-mappa, who died on 31-12-1915. After his deaththe title to this property vested in Balappa, who was then a minor. Gurushiddawa, who was act ingas the 'de facto' guardian of Balappa and as such was managing his properties, executed themortgage in suit on 12-10-1927, for Rs. 800. The amount for which the mortgage was executedrepresented a past debt due by Shidramappa in respect of the sari business which he was carrying onduring his lifetime. The mortgage deed purported to be a possessory mortgage. It also contained aspecific covenant to repay the mortgage amount within five years.In the present suit which was instituted by the plaintiffs on 30-8-1948, it was alleged that- the mortgagee had allowed the mortgagor to remain in possession as his tenant, that the tenancy continueduntil 12-10-1933, and so it was claimed that the present suit for possession of the mortgagedproperty was in time. In the alternative a claim to recover the mortgage amount was made. Thedefendants resisted both the claims on several grounds. It was urged by them that the mortgage wasnot for a legal necessity, nor for the benefit of the minor Balappa, that the lease alleged by themortgagee had never been executed and that in fact the mortgagee had never obtained possession,that the claim for possession as well as the claim to recover the mortgage amount were barred bylimitation.It has been held by both the Courts below that though the mortgage was for the benefit of the minorBalappa, the mortgagee's claim to recover possession was barred by limitation because the case oftenancy set up by him had not been proved. Both the Courts have also held that the mortgagee'sclaim to recover the mortgage amount was also barred under Article 132, Limitation Act. In thepresent appeal Mr. Datar for the appellants does not challenge the conclusion of the Courts belowthat the plaintiffs' suit for possession of the mortgaged properties is barred by time. He, however,contends that the Courts below were wrong in holding that the plaintiffs' claim to recover themortgage amount was barred by time under Article 132, Limitation Act. That is how the onlySidramaya Nilkanthayaswami ... vs Danava Shidramappa Deshnur And ... on 30 July, 1953Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1797361/1question which arises for decision in this appeal is whether the Courts below were right indismissing the plaintiffs' claim to recover the mortgage amount on the ground that it is barred bytime.3. In dealing with this question of limitation we have to bear in mind the fact that the mortgagee wasentitled to obtain possession from the mortgagor and possession in fact had not been delivered tohim. The contention of the defendants is that as soon as the mortgagee found that the mortgagorwas committing a default in delivering possession of the mortgaged property to him, it was his rightand his obligation to sue for the mortgage amount. This contention is raised on the strength of theprovisions of Section 68(1)(d), Transfer of Property Act. Section 68 provides for the right ofthe-mortgagee to sue for the mortgage money in certain cases. Section 68(1)(d) deals with the casewhere the mortgagee is entitled to possession of the mortgaged property but the mortgagor fails todeliver the same to him, and it provides that in such a case the mortgagee has a right to sue for themortgage money. The argument is that as soon as the provisions of Section 68(1)(d) come into play,the mortgagee's right to sue for the mortgage money becomes his obligation and in that sense theamount due under the mortgage becomes immediately due. If this contention is right, limitation willstart against the mortgagee in respect of his claim to recover the mortgage amount from the timethat Section 68(1)(d) comes into play.Article 132 allows twelve years' period to the mortgagee to enforce payment of money charged uponimmovable property and it lays down that this period of twelve years begins to run when the moneysued for becomes due. if it is held that by virtue of the provisions of Section 68(1)(d) the money dueunder the suit mortgage immediately "becomes due", then limitation would start as soon as Section68(1)(d) comes into operation, and the present suit is clearly beyond twelve years thereafter. On theother hand, the plaintiffs' contention is that Section 68(1)(d) primarily deals with cases ofpossessory mortgages which do not contain a personal covenant to pay, and the elfect of Section68(1)(d) in such cases is to clothe the mortgagee with the right to sue for the mortgage money incase the mortgagor commits a default in delivering possession of the mortgaged property to themortgagee. It may be conceded that in the case of such a mortgage where there is no personalcovenant to pay, the mortgagee would have to sue within 12 years from the time that his cause ofaction under Section 68(1)(d) accrues to him. In other words, if in the mortgage bond with which weare concerned there had not been a specific personal covenant to pay, the suit filed by the mortgageeobviously beyond 12 years from the failure of the mortgagor to deliver possession to the mortgageewould have to be held to be barred by limitation.4. But the question which falls to be considered in the present case is whether the same result wouldfollow in spite of the fact that the mortgage deed contains a personal covenant to pay and, the periodstipulated for the payment under this covenant is five years. If it is held that this personal covenantgoverns the relations between the parties, then the cause of action to the mortgagee to enforce thiscovenant would accrue five years after the date of the mortgage and his present suit to recover themortgage amount would be in time. Can it be said that the effect of the provisions of Section68(1)(d) is to reduce the longer period of limitation which would be available to the mortgagee byvirtue of the specific terms of the contract of mortgage? We would like to add that it has beenconceded before us that the provisions of Section 68 apply to the suit mortgage; it is, therefore, onSidramaya Nilkanthayaswami ... vs Danava Shidramappa Deshnur And ... on 30 July, 1953Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1797361/2that basis that we propose to deal with the point of limitation raised before us.5. There can be no doubt that the provisions of Section 68, T. P. Act are intended for the benefit ofthe mortgagee, and, as I have just indicated, in the case of ordinary usufructuary mortgages thissection confers upon the mortgagee the right, which he normally does not possess, to sue for themortgage money in case the mortgagor commits a default in delivering possession of the mortgagedproperty. If we were to accept the view which has succeeded in the Courts below, it would reallymean that by his own default the mortgagor succeeds in depriving the mortgagee of the largerperiod of limitation available to him by virtue of the specific terms of the contract. If the mortgagorhad acted fairly and had carried out the terms of the contract, the mortgagee would have remainedin possession and would have been entitled to sue for the mortgage amount within 12 years after theexpiration of five years as mentioned in the contract. He commits a default in delivering possessionof the mortgaged property and he insists that the necessary consequence of his default is that themortgagee must sue for the mortgage amount straightaway despite the period of five years which isexpressly mentioned in the contract itself.In our opinion, the effect of the provisions of Section 68(1)(d) is to confer upon the mortgagee theright to sue for the mortgage amount. If there is no personal covenant to pay in the mortgage bond,this right would have to be exercised by him within the prescribed period of twelve years from thedate of the mortgagor's default. But if there is a personal covenant to pay in the mortgage bond, theterms of that covenant would not be adversely affected or restricted by the provisions of Section68(1)(d). In such a case, the statutory right conferred upon the mortgagee under Section 68(1)(d) aswell as the contractual right given to him by the specific terms of the contract are both intended forhis benefit. If the mortgagee elects to exercise his~ statutory right, then he would be entitled torecover the mortgage amount on the footing that by virtue of the default of the mortgagor theamount has become due if, on the other hand, he does not elect to exercise this statutory right butstands by his contractual right, he would be entitled to sue for the mortgage amount within 12 yearsafter the expiration of the period stipulated in the contract.We are not disposed to take the view that even without the election by the mortgagee the defaultcommitted by the mortgagor necessarily and automatically makes the mortgage amount due withinthe meaning of Section 68, T. P. Act. If this view were to be accepted, it would lead to the mostunreasonable result that the mortgagor can safely nullify the terms of the contract and compel themortgagee to sue for the mortgage amount by committing a default in the discharge of his ownobligations. The contract between the parties shows that the mortgagee advanced the amount of Rs.800 to the mortgagor on the security of the mort-gaged property and he gave the mortgagor theright to pay this amount five years after the date of the mortgage. The mortgagor, therefore, couldnot have offered to pay the mortgage amount and to redeem the mortgage before the period of fiveyears was over. In other words, the mortgagee was entitled to the possession of the security for fiveyears and the mortgagor was not at liberty to redeem the mortgage during this period. The fact thatthe mortgagor commits a default in delivering possession of the mortgaged property cannot, wethink, be held to lead to his benefit by compelling the mortgagee to sue for the mort-gage amountwithin twelve years after his default.Sidramaya Nilkanthayaswami ... vs Danava Shidramappa Deshnur And ... on 30 July, 1953Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1797361/3If the words of Section 68(1)(d) are construed to mean that as soon as the statutory right conferredon the mortgagee by the said provision accrues to the mortgagee he is bound to exercise that right inspite of a contract to the contrary, it would, we think, lead to an unreasonable if not impossibleposition. That is why we would prefer to construe the provisions of Section 68(1)(d) to mean that ifthe mortgagee has no right to sue for the mortgage money by virtue of the mortgage deed as such, hewould be entitled to sue for the mortgage amount in case the mortgagor commits a default asmentioned in Section 68(1)(d). If the mortgage deed specifically provides for a personal covenant topay, the mortgagee may either exercise his option under S, 68(1) (d) or may act under the terms ofthe personal covenant itself. If the option is exercised by him under Section 68(1)(d), the mortgageamount becomes due and the mortgagor will have to submit to a decree for the payment of the saidamount. If the option under Section 68(1)(d) is not exercised by the mortgagee, the amount cannotbe said to "be due" and the mortgagor will have to wait for the expiration of the stipulated periodbefore he can redeem the property. In our opinion, the default of the mortgagor cannot be permittedto accelerate the period of redemption in his own favour.6. The Courts below have taken a contrary view because of the Judgment of Mr. Justice Lokur in --'Dnyanoba Gangaram v. Dattoba Balappa, (A)'. It is undoubtedly true that Mr. Justice Lokur wasdealing with the same point of limitation on facts which cannot be distinguished from those beforeus and he held that the effect of the provisions of Section 68(1)(d), T. P. Act was that as soon as themortgagor committed a default in delivering possession of the mortgaged property to themortgagee, the mortgage debt became payable immediately and the mortgagee has to sue for themortgage amount within twelve years thereafter. With respect, we are unable to accept Mr. justiceLokur's conclusion.In dealing with this point Mr. Justice Lokur relied upon a decision of the Privy Council in -'Narsingh Partan v. Mahommad Yakub Khan', AIR 1929 PC 139 (C). In this case, however, theirLordships of the Privy Council were not called upon to consider the question of limitation in theform in which it arose before Mr. Justice Lokur and in which it arises before us.' They were dealingwith a document of mortgage executed on 8-4-1923, which was a combination of a simple mortgageand an usufructuary mortgage. This deed provided that possession of the hypothecated property hadbeen delivered to the mortgagee and it added that the principle amount was to be repaid within 35years, and on failure of the mortgagor to so pay the amount at the appointed time, the mortgageewas empowered to realise the same by sale of the mortgaged property, it appeared that themortgagor failed to discharge his obligation of making over possession to the mortgagee and inconsequence the mortgagee sued the mortgagor on 14-5-1924, for recovery of the mortgage money,by sale of the mortgaged property. On these facts the Privy Council held, on the construction of thedocument, that it was a combination of a simple mortgage and an usufructuary mortgage and soitdid not coaie within the category of an "anomalous" mortgage referred to in Section 98, T. P. Act.They further held that in consequence of the wrongful act or default on the part of the mortgagor innot delivering possession of the hypothecated properties to the mortgagee the mortgage moneybecame payable by virtue of Section 68, T. P. Act and the mortgagee was, therefore, entitled to animmediate enforcement of the mortgage by a decree for sale of the mortgaged property. It would benoticed that in this case the mortgagor had urged that the cause of action would accrue to theSidramaya Nilkanthayaswami ... vs Danava Shidramappa Deshnur And ... on 30 July, 1953Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1797361/4mortgagee only after the period of 35 years mentioned in the mortgage deed had expired and thiscontention was rejected by the Privy Council. In other words, he effect of this decision appears to bethat though a larger period of limitation was available to the mortgagee to sue the mortgagor forrecovery of the mortgage amount, it was open to him to sue the mortgagor earlier as soon aa defaultwas committed by him in delivering possession of the property to the mortgagee.With respect, we think it would not be a reasonable reading of this judgment to hold that the privyCouncil took the view that the only remedy open to the mortgagee was to sue within twelve yearsafter the mortgagor's default in question. That aspect of the matter did not fall to be considered inthe said case, because in fact the mortgagee had sued immediately after the mortgagor's default tookplace. We are, therefore, not prepared to accept Mr. Justice Lokur's conclusion that this decisionrequires the mortgagee to sue in every case within twelve years after the mortgagor's default hasoccurred. In our opinion, this decision is consistent with the view which we are taking that themortgagee in such a case has the option to sue the mortgagor within twelve years either from thedate of the mortgagor's default or from the date of the expiration of the period mentioned in themortgage deed. With respect, we would-hesitate to hold that the right conferred on the mortgageeby Section 68(1)(d) is really in the nature of an obligation and so it must be exercised within twelveyears thereafter notwithstanding the fact that a larger 'period is available to him under the mortgagedeed.7. Mr. Justice Lokur has also referred to a decision of the Calcutta High Court reported in -'Afiruddin v. Joy Chandra . This judgment again, with respect, does not seem to be either helpful ordirectly in point. The decision of the question of limitation was based substantially on theconstruction of the document with which the Court was dealing, because it has been held that "uponthe wording of the document as it stands the plaintiff was entitled to sue for the mortgage money onhis being dispossessed by the mortgagor in April 1914." It is true that Section 68 has also beenmentioned by Mr. Justice Guha who delivered the judgment of the Bench; but the question as towhether the mortgagee cannot avail himself of the longer period available to him under themortgage deed was not raised before the Court Raid has not oeen considered8. In our opinion, the view that Section 68(1)(d) im-poses upon the mortgagee an obligation to sueforthwith for the mortgage amount even though a larger period of limitation is available to himunder the specific terms of the contract would lead to very unreasonable results. We think thelanguage of Section 68(1)(d) permits a more reasonable and equitable construction to be put uponits provisions by holding that the statutory right conferred upon the mortgagee does not necessarilyimpair the contractual right where such a right is available to him by the terms of the contract andthat in such a case it is for the mortgagee to decide wheter for he accepts the statutory right orstands by the contractual right. The option must be his and lot of the defaulting mortgagor.9. A similar point arose for decision before the Privy Council in - 'AIR 1932 PC 207 (B)'. Themortgage with which the Privy Council were concerned was for a period of six years and it wasexecuted on 25-7-1912. The mortgage contained a clause by which in case of default the mortgageewas to have power before the expiration of the stipulated period 1,0 realise the principal and interestby sale of litc mortgaged property. Default in the payment of interest ^s required "by the mortgageSidramaya Nilkanthayaswami ... vs Danava Shidramappa Deshnur And ... on 30 July, 1953Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1797361/5had been made in the very first year after the mortgage was executed and the suit was filed torecover the mortgage amount on 28-2-1928. The sole .question which arose for decision on thesefacts was whether the mortgagee's suit was barred under Article 132, Limitation Act. If the terms ofthe contract ware strictly enforced, then it would have been possible to hold that the mortgagee'ssuit was barred by limitation. On the other hand, if it was held that the option given to themortgagee by the terms of the contract to recover the whole of the mortgage amount in case therewas a default by the mortgagor was for his benefit and it was open to him either to act upon thatclause or to wait for the full statuory period to recover the mortgage amount, then his suit would bein time because tha mortgage itself had stipulated for a period of six years and the suit which wasfiled in 1928 was clearly within 12 years thereafter.Sir George Lowndes who delivered the judgment of the Board held that the suit was within time, andhe emphasised that the proviso in the mortgage bond was intended exclusively for the benefit of themortgagee and it purports to give the mortgagee an option cither to enforce his security at once, or ifthe security is ample, to stand by his investment for the full term of the mortgage. The learned Judgethen proceeded to add that if on the default of the mortgagor the mortgage money is held to becomeimmediately due, it would clearly defeat the intention of the parties and it would lead to thisimpossible result that what was agreed by them as an option in the mortgagee is in effect convertedinto an option in the mortgagor.It is true as Mr. Hungund has pointed out that the option with which the Privy Council were dealinghad been given to the mortgagee by a contract. But the point which has been emphasised in thisjudgment is that it would be unreasonable to allow the default committed by the mortgagor toimpair the rights of the mortgagee, and we think this principle can be appropriately applied evenwhile we are dealing with the statutory right conferred upon the mortgagee by Section 68(1)(d), T. P.Act. Unfortunately, this judgment does not appear to have been cited before Mr. Justice Lokur. Wemight incidentally refer to the commentary in Mulla's Transfer of Property Act under Section63(1)(d) where this point has been considered. Referring to the right accruing to the mortgageeunder Section 68(1)(d) it is observed:  "This is a statutory right irrespective of any express covenant,    if the mortgagee omits to sue under this clause so that his remedy under Clause (d) is time barred, then, if there is no personal covenant in the usufructuary mortgage, the mortgagee has no other cause of action."   This   view   clearly   suggests   that if   there   is a personal covenant in the usufructuary mortgage, the right under the said covenant would not be defeated merely because the right under Section 68(1)(d) has become time-barred.10. We would accordingly hold that the Courts below were wrong in coming to the conclusion that the mortgagee's suit to recover the mortgage amount was barred under Article 132, Limitation Act.11. The result is, the appeal would be allowed, the decrees passed by the Courts below set aside and the case sent back to the trial Court for disposal in accordance with law. Appellants would be entitled to their costs throughout.12. Appeal allowed.Sidramaya Nilkanthayaswami ... vs Danava Shidramappa Deshnur And ... on 30 July, 1953Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1797361/6