Madhya Pradesh High CourtSultan Khan S/O Jugge Khan vs State Of Madhya Pradesh And Anr. on 29 October, 1987Equivalent citations: 1991 (0) MPLJ 81Author: G C GuptaBench: G C GuptaJUDGMENT Gulab C. Gupta, J.1. This second appeal, filed by the plaintiff Under Section 100, Civil Procedure Code is directedagainst the judgment and decree dated 20-10-1982, passed by Addl. Judge to the Court of DistrictJudge, Sehore in Civil Appeal No. 185-A of 1982, arising out of judgment and decree, dated25-9-1980, passed by the Civil Judge, Class II, Sehore in Civil Suit No. 53-A of 1979, dismissing theappellant's suit for declaration of title over 10 acres of land of Khasra No. 202/1, situated at villageMundla Kalan, Tahsil and District Sehore (hereinafter referred to as the 'suit land').2. The appellant filed the present suit on 13-12-1974, seeking declaration of his title over the suitland based on his long and continued possession for about 4 decades as owner thereof. His case wasthat his father Jugge Khan was in cultivating possession of the suit land during his life time and hispossession is even recorded in revenue records since 1351 Fasli year i.e. 1944 A.D. Appellant alsosubmitted that his father died about 10 years before and therefore, the suit land came into hispossession. According to him, the Sub-Divisional Officer, Sehore declared the suit land as serviceland and issued a Patta for 7.18 acres in favour of respondent No. 2 by his order, dated 10-8-1972and thereafter, Naib Tahsildar started eviction g|oceedings against him Under Section 248 of the M.P. Land Revenue Code (hereinafter referred to as 'The Code'). According to him, he felt aggrieved bythis order and filed the appeal before the Collector, Sehore which was dismissed. He, therefore,prayed for a declaration that he is the Bhumiswarni of the suit land, that Patta allotment of land infavour of respondent No. 2 was illegal and void and the eviction proceedings were also illegal. Theappellant based his claim over the suit land on adverse possession for more than the statuory periodof 30 years. The respondent-State contested the claim and denied that the appellant was or hasbecome the owner of the suit lands. According to them Jugge Khan and the appellant were thetrespassers, and have been proceeded against from time to time. Their specific case was that theappellant has paid fine for illegal occupation. They, therefore denied the ownership of the appellantbased on adverse possession. The learned trial Judge, on the basis of evidence on record, held that itwas not proved that the appellant and his father were in continuous adverse possession of the suitland for about 4 decades. The learned Judge, however, held that the appellant and his father were inpossession of a part of the suit land since 1944 but since they have been ordered to be evicted in theyear 1972, they could not perfect their title by adverse possession. The suit was accordinglydismissed. These findings have been affirmed by the lower appellate Court in appeal and hence thissecond appeal.3. This Court while admitting this appeal fr final hearing on 7-2-1983 framed the followingsubstantial question for its consideration : -"Whether in the facts and circumstances of this case, the plaintiff has perfected his title by adversepossession against the State as he is in adverse possession of the land since the Fasli Year 1351 (1944Sultan Khan S/O Jugge Khan vs State Of Madhya Pradesh And Anr. on 29 October, 1987Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1858357/1A.D.) as recorded in the revenue papers?"Submission of the learned counsel for the appellant is that he has been in continuous possession ofthe suit land upto the date of the suit and even thereafter as per order of the Court. Since hispossession before the date of the suit has been as owner and for more than 30 years, he would bedeemed to be in continuous adverse possession entitling him to the declaration that he has becomethe owner thereof. Specific submission of the appellant is that eviction procedings Under Section248 of the Code or the allotment order in favour of the respondent No. 2 would not interrupt hispossession or the adverse possession. Reliance is placed on Fatima Bibi v.'Hajee Muhammad, AIR1943 Mad. 425; D. G. Nidhi v. K. L. Chettiar, AIR 1939 Mad. 456; and Shri Damodar v. HemaNarayan, AIR 1969 Ori. 54.4. The finding that the appellant is found to be in occupation of a part of suit land since 1944 is theconcurrent finding recorded by the two Courts below. This finding is based on revenue records,certified copies of which have been filed by both the parties. Under the circumstances, the finding isnot only binding on this Court because it is a concurrent finding of fact but also because it is a goodfinding of fact. It must, therefore, be accepted that the appellant and before him his father was inoccupation of a part of the suit land. It is appellant's own case that by an order, dated 11-8-1972, hehas been ordered to be evicted from this land and the same has been allotted in favour of respondentNo. 2. In case the appellant's possession is treated to be adverse from 1944, he would have perfectedhis title over this land on the date of the suit, if this order, dated 11-8-1972 and subsequentproceedings Under Section 248 of the Code have no effect on it. Under the circumstances, theimportant question for consideration in this appeal is whether the adverse possession of theappellant was interrupted on 11-8-1972 when proceedings Under Section 248 of the Code werestarted? The decisions of Madras High Court relied upon by the appellant, do not exactly deal withthis point. According to these decisions, mere declaration of title of the defendant without any thingdone to recover possession does not amount to interruption in possession of the plaintiff. ShriDamodar's case of the Orissa High Court has, however carried this reasoning and logic further andhas held that since possession is not disturbed, even the adverse possession will not be treated asdisturbed and will continue. There is, however, no discussion in this judgment and thereforenothing to understand why it has been so held. If this conclusion is accepted, a trespasser will beable to perfect his title even during the pendency of the suit for recovery of possession from him.This however, is not the intention of the law. It is well-settled that the status of the parties has to bedetermined on the basis of facts as they exist on the date of suit. It is true that in the instant case, nosuit for recovery of possession was filed but only proceedings Under Section 248 of the Code wereinitiated. Section 248 of the Code only provides an alternative forum for recovery of possession andtherefore, proceedings under this provision will have the same effect as a suit in a regular CivilCourt. Since a suit for recovery of possession is sufficient to interrupt the adverse possession,proceedings Under Section 248 of the Code must have the same effect. In Sultan Jehan Begum v.Gul Mohd., 1972 MPLJ 969 = AIR 1973 M.P. 72 a Division Bench of this Court considered indetailthe law on the subject and clarified it as under :-."In our view the law is clearly this :Sultan Khan S/O Jugge Khan vs State Of Madhya Pradesh And Anr. on 29 October, 1987Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1858357/2(1) When a person entitled to possession does not bring a suit against the person in adversepossession within the time prescribed by law his right to possession is extinguished. From this itonly follows that if the former begins suit against the latter within the prescribed period of limitationhis right will not be extinguished.(2) If a decree for possession is passed in that suit in his favour he will be entitled to possessionirrespective of the time spent in the suit and the execution and other proceedings.(3) The very institution of the suit arrests the period of adverse possession of the defendant andwhen a decree for possession is passed against the defendant the plaintiff's right to be put inpossession relates back to the date of the suit.(4) Section 28 of the Limitation Act merely declares when the right of the person out of possession isextinguished. It is not correct to say that section confers title on the person who has been in adversepossession for a certain period. There is no law which provides for 'conferral of title' as such on aperson who has been in adverse possession for whatever length of time.(5) When it is said that the person in adverse possession 'has perfected his title', it only means this.Since the person who had the right of possession but allowed his right to be extinguished by hisinaction, he cannot obtain the possession from the person in adverse possession, and, as itsnecessary corollary the person who is in adverse possession against the other not in possession, onthe well settled rule of law that possession of one person cannot be disturbed by any person exceptone who has a better title."It must, therefore, be accepted that filing of the suit for recovery of possession, by itself, is suficientto arrest the period of adverse possession and a decree for possesssion could be passed irrespectiveof the time taken in deciding the suit. If this principle is applied to the proceedings Under Section248 of the Code, it must be held that in case a person has not perfected his title by adversepossession before start of the proceedings, he cannot perfect his title during the pendency of theproceedings. Adverse possession of the person in possession must be deemed to have been arrestedby initiation of these proceedings. This Court has, therefore, no hesitation in holding that adversepossession of the appellant was interrupted and arrested on 11-8-1972 when proceedings UnderSection 248 of the Code were initiated against him. Since he has not completed 30 years ofpossession before 11-8-1972, his possession even if adverse cannot confer any right or title on him.5. Shri Damodar's case (supra) relied on by the learned counsel for the appellant is no doubt capableof supporting the submission that the adverse possession continues in spite of proceedings as longas it is not brought to end by delivery of possession and therefore, the title by adverse possessioncould be acquired even during the pendency of the suit for possession. This case is however contraryto the decision of this Court in Sultan Jehan Begum's case (supra). Indeed a Division Bench ofOrissa High Court in Artabandhu v. Bisweswar, AIR 1979 Ori. 110 reconsidered the matter andoverruled Shri Damodar's case (supra) and approved the view of this Court in Sultan Jehan Begum'scase (supra). Under the circumstances, the said case must be held to have been decided wrongly andtherefore, not sufficient to provide support to the appellant. It is rather unfortunate that the learnedSultan Khan S/O Jugge Khan vs State Of Madhya Pradesh And Anr. on 29 October, 1987Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1858357/3counsel for the appellant did not investigate the matter fully and relied on an overruled decision.6. The appeal fails and is dismissed with costs. Counsel's fee as per rules.Sultan Khan S/O Jugge Khan vs State Of Madhya Pradesh And Anr. on 29 October, 1987Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1858357/4