Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – Section 311 – Power to recall the witnesses – Issue of a right to a fair trial – Purpose of cross-examination of a witness – Cross-examination or the absence of it due to unavailability of counsel – Right to cross- examination is a part of right to fair trial, which, every person has in the spirit of the right to life and personal liberty as enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution of India. In the case in hand, on the relevant date i.e. on 03.05.2018, the petitioner remained absent in the court and his counsel also remained absent though he has filed hazira. Thus, the petitioner remained unrepresented on that day. Therefore, the impugned order, closing the evidence of P.W.1, behind the back of the petitioners and also his counsel, is denial of fair hearing, as it has infringed their right to fair trial.Advocate for the Petitioner : MR. N K MURRY
Advocate for the Respondent : MR J CHOPRA1. This petition, under section 482 Cr.P.C., read with section 397/401 of the Cr.P.C., is preferred by M/S – S. B. Industries, (petitioner No.1) of Borpukhuri & Md. Zakir Hussain (petitioner No.2), S/o Jumil Akhtar, Borpukhuri and Smti. Sahnaz Begum(petitioner No.3), W/o Zakir Hussain, C/o S.B. Electronics, R.N.P. Road, Ward No.14, Hojai, Assam, challenging the legality, propriety and correctness of the orders dated 03.05.2018 and 06.04.2019, passed by Shri I.A. Hazarika, Judicial Magistrate 1 st class, Kamrup (M) in case No. C. R. 3366/2016 (M/s S.B. Industries & 2 Others Vs. M/s Eastern Infratech). It is to be mentioned here that vide impugned order dated 03.05.2018, the ld. Court below has not only closed cross-examination of the P.W.1, but also issued NBWA against the petitioners No. 2 and 3, and vide impugned order dated 06.04.2019, the ld. Court below has rejected the petition filed by the petitioner u/s 311 Cr.P.C. for allowing them to cross-examine P.W.1.2. Heard Mr. N. K. Murry, learned counsel for the petitioners and also heard Mr. J. Chopra, learned counsel for the respondent.3. The factual background, leading to filing of the present petition is adumbrated herein below:-4. Being highly aggrieved, the petitioners preferred this revision petition on the following grounds:-5. Mr. N.K. Murry, the ld. Counsel for the petitioners has submitted that there was no legally enforceable debt between the parties and that the respondent has misused the cheque and to unfurl the truth, cross-examination of P.W.1 is very much necessary here in this case. Mr. Murry further submitted that the ld. Court below, by dismissing the petition to allow cross-examination of P.W. 1, failed to exercise its judicial discretion under section 311 Cr.P.C. It is further submitted that he has been newly engaged in this case and he is not aware of the conduct of earlier lawyer and that for conduct of lawyer, the petitioner should not suffer, and that only one chance may be afforded to the petitioners to prove their case by allowing them to cross-examine the P.W.1.6. Per contra, Mr. J. Chopra, the learned counsel for the respondent, vehemently opposed the petition. Taking this Court through the impugned order dated 03.05.2016, the ld. Counsel has submitted that the ld. Court below has given sufficient opportunities to the petitioners to cross-examine the P.W.1, but, the petitioners have failed to avail the same and being left with no other option the ld. Court below has closed the evidence of P.W.1. It is further submitted that section 311 Cr.P.C. cannot be used as a delaying tactics. Mr. Chopra has referred one case law Shivnarayan Shakya Vs. State of M.P. (M. Cr. C. No. 13215/2015), and submitted that the petitioners have failed to furnish any reason as to why it has failed to cross-examine the witness. In support of his submission Mr. Chopra has submitted another case law Criminal Revision Case No. 206 of 2012 of Andhra Pradesh High Court. It is further submitted that the ld. Court below has rightly rejected the petition No. 4244/2018, vide order dated 06.08.2019, and as such no interference of this court is warranted and therefore, it is contended to dismiss the petition.7. Having heard the submission of the ld. Advocates of both side I have gone through the impugned orders and the documents placed on record and also gone through the case laws referred by the ld. Counsel for the respondent and I find sufficient force in his submission. The ld. Court below, in the impugned order dated 03.05.2018, has noted that the case was posted for cross-examination of P.W.1 on 30.05.2017, and since then ample opportunities were afforded to the petitioners to complete cross-examination of P.W.1. But, the accused persons could not avail the opportunity. And on that day, i.e. 03.05.2018, also the petitioners have failed to cross-examine the P.W.1. Instead, on that day neither the accused nor his counsel remained present in the court, though the ld. Counsel has filed hazira in the court. Then being left with no option the ld. Court below has closed the evidence of the P.W.1.8. Now, it is to be seen how far the ld. Court below is justified in closing the evidence of P.W. 1, when the petitioner remained absent in the court and the counsel for the petitioner also remained absent in the court on that day, though he has filed hazira. In a similar fact situation, Hon’ble Supreme Court in Mohd. Hussain Zulfikar Ali: (2012) 2 SCC 584, his Lordship Hon’ble Dattu, J (as His Lordship then was) writing a separate, but concurring judgment on the issue of a right to a fair trial, particularly, in the context of cross-examination (or the absence of it due to unavailability of counsel) held as under:-9. What transpired from the above discussion is that right to cross- examination is a part of right to fair trial, which, every person has in the spirit of the right to life and personal liberty as enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution of India. In the case in hand, on the relevant date i.e. on 03.05.2018, the petitioner remained absent in the court and his counsel also remained absent though he has filed hazira. Thus, the petitioner remained unrepresented on that day. Therefore, the impugned order, closing the evidence of P.W.1, behind the back of the petitioners and also his counsel, is denial of fair hearing, as it has infringed their right to fair trial.10. It also appears from the documents placed on record that the petitioners have not at all cross-examined the P.W.1. And as such the very object of cross-examination as stated in Karter Singh Vs. State of Punjab (supra) stands frustrated here in this case and as such great injustice is caused to them. Had the impugned order dated 03.05.2018, been passed after hearing the petitioner or their counsel, then the situation would have been complete different. By the impugned order dated 06.04.2018, the ld. Court below has allowed to continue the injustice that has perpetrated upon the petitioners by the impugned order dated 03.05.2018. Therefore, the ld. Court below has committed illegality by rejecting the petition No. 4244 by the impugned order dated 06.04.2018.11. In view of above discussion and finding it cannot be said that impugned order dated 03.05.2018, passed by which the ld. Court below closing the evidence of P.W.1, behind the back of the petitioner and his counsel, and subsequent impugned order dated 06.04.2018, by which the ld. Court below, after hearing ld. Advocates of both sides declined to invoke its jurisdiction under section 311 Cr.P.C, to allow the petitioners to cross-examine P.W.1 and other listed witnesses of the complainant withstand the test of legality, propriety and correctness. It is worthwhile to mention here in this context that in A.R. Antuley vs. R.S. Nayak : (1988)2 SCC 602, a seven Judge Bench of Hon’ble Supreme Court has held that when an order has been passed in violation of a fundamental right or in breach of the principles of natural justice, the same would be nullity. Reference can also be made to two more decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court in State of Haryana Vs. State of Punjab: (2004)12 SCC 673, and Rajasthan SRTC Vs. Zakir Hussain: (2005) 7 SCC 447.12. While rejecting the petition No.4244, filed by the petitioner the ld. Court below has held that the order dated 03.05.2018, by which the evidence of the P.W.1 was closed, has not been challenged by the accused side and further held that it has no power to recall its own order. However, the ld. Court below has held that the accused persons are at liberty to call any witness at the stage of D.W. It is well settled that criminal courts have no power to recall its own order. But, the reason, so assigned by the ld. Court below, for rejecting the prayer in the petition No. 4244 cannot be said to be based on sound principle of law, in view of discussion and finding in forgoing para.13. Section 311 Cr.P.C. deals with power to summon material witness, or examined persons present. It provides that any court may, at any stage of enquiry, trial or other proceeding under this code, summon any person as a witness, or examine any persons in attendance, though not summoned as a witness, or recall and re- examine any person already examined; and the court shall summon and examine or recall and re-examine any such person if his evidence appears to it to be essential to the just decision of the case.14. A bare perusal of the section reveals that when the conditions under the sections are satisfied the court can call a witness not only on the motion of either of the prosecution or the defence, but also it can do so on its own motion. In Mohanlal Shyamji Soni Vs. Union of India, (1991) Crl. J.J. 152 (SC), while dealing with the power to under section 311 Cr.P.C., Hon’ble Supreme Court has held that –“the power of Court to re-call any witness or witnesses already examined or to summon any witness can be invoked even if the evidence in both sides is closes so long as the Court retain seisin of the criminal proceeding.”15. Following the aforesaid principle, Hon’ble Supreme Court in Mannan Sheikh Vs. State of West Bengal (2014) 13 SCC 59, held that –16. Here in this case, it appears from the impugned order dated 03.05.2018, that in a span of almost one year, ample opportunities were afforded to the petitioners. But, the petitioners have failed to avail the same. They have failed to assign any reason, not to speak of a plausible one, as to why they could not cross-examine the P.W.1. The ld. Counsel for the respondent has rightly pointed this out during hearing, and the law laid down in the case of Shivnarayan Shakya Vs. State of M.P. (supra) referred by him also fortified his submission. But, since the impugned order dated 03.05.2018, has been passed behind the back of the petitioners and their counsel and there by infringed their right to fair trial, the ld. Court below ought to have allowed the petition by exercising the jurisdiction under section 311 Cr.P.C.17. In the result, I find sufficient merit in this revision petition, and accordingly, the same stands allowed. The impugned orders, dated 03.05.2018, and 06.04.2018, stands set aside. The parties are directed appear before the ld. Court below on 12.11.2021 and on their appearance, the ld. Court below shall afford a chance to the petitioners to cross-examine the P.W.1. In the event of failing to cross- examine P.W.1, on that day by the petitioners, or on a subsequent date to be fixed by the ld. Court below, then the ld. Court below shall proceeds to next stage of the trial. Send down the record of ld. Court below with a copy of this judgment and order. The parties have to bear their own cost.