Bail – While elaborating reasons may not be assigned for grant of bail, at the same time an order de hors reasoning or bereft of the relevant reasons cannot result in grant of bail. It would be only a non speaking order which is an instance of violation of principles of natural justice. In such a case the prosecution or the informant has a right to assail the order before a higher forum.While we are conscious of the fact that liberty of an individual is an invaluable right, at the same time while considering an application for bail Courts cannot lose sight of the serious nature of the accusations against an accused and the facts that have a bearing in the case, particularly, when the accusations may not be false, frivolous or vexatious in nature but are supported by adequate material brought on record so as to enable a Court to arrive at a prima facie conclusion. While considering an application for grant of bail a prima facie conclusion must be supported by reasons and must be arrived at after having regard to the vital facts of the case brought on record. Due consideration must be given to facts suggestive of the nature of crime, the criminal antecedents of the accused, if any, and the nature of punishment that would follow a conviction vis­à­vis the offence/s alleged against an accused.It is not necessary for a Court to give elaborate reasons while granting bail particularly when the case is at the initial stage and the allegations of the offences by the accused would not have been crystalised as such. There cannot be elaborate details recorded to give an impression that the case is one that would result in a conviction or, by contrast, in an acquittal while passing an order on an application for grant of bail. At the same time, a balance would have to be struck between the nature of the allegations made against the accused; severity of the punishment if the allegations are proved beyond reasonable doubt and would result in a conviction; reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being influenced by the accused; tampering of the evidence; the frivolity in the case of the prosecution; criminal antecedents of the accused; and a prima facie satisfaction of the Court in support of the charge against the accused. Ultimately, the Court considering an application for bail has to exercise discretion in a judicious manner and in accordance with the settled principles of law having regard to the crime alleged to be committed by the accused on the one hand and ensuring purity of the trial of the case on the other. [Paras 25 – 28]Penal Code, 1860 – Ss. 341, 307 r/w. 34 – Arms Act, 1959 – S. 27 – Bail – Accused has criminal antecedents – there has been a history of enmity between the accused and the deceased – ­Accused shot with a fire arm, namely, a pistol on two occasions – Accused had absconded for a period of seven months after the complaint in respect of the second offence was lodged against him – Therefore, his arrest was delayed – Accused had threatened the informant mother of the deceased – there is a likelihood of the ­accused absconding or threatening the witnesses if on bail which would have a vital bearing on the trial of the cases – High court has lost sight of the vital aspects of the case and in very cryptic orders has granted bail to the accused – the High Court was not right in allowing the applications for bail filed by the ­accused – Hence, the impugned orders passed by the High Court are set aside. [Para 29]Legal Maxim – “cessante ratione legis cessat ipsa lex” – Meaning – “reason is the soul of the law, and when the reason of any particular law ceases, so does the law itself”.Principles which are to be considered while granting bail(a) While granting bail the court has to keep in mind not only the nature of the accusations, but the severity of the punishment, if the accusation entails a conviction and the nature of evidence in support of the accusations.(b) Reasonable apprehensions of the witnesses being tampered with or the apprehension of there being a threat for the complainant should also weigh with the court in the matter of grant of bail.(c) While it is not expected to have the entire evidence establishing the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt but there ought always to be a prima facie satisfaction of the court in support of the charge.(d) Frivolity in prosecution should always be considered and it is only the element of genuineness that shall have to be considered in the matter of grant of bail, and in the event of there being some doubt as to the genuineness of the prosecution, in the normal course of events, the accused is entitled to an order of bail.”Duty to accord reasons for a decision arrived at by a court – Principles.(a) Insistence on recording of reasons is meant to serve the wider principle of justice that justice must not only be done it must also appear to be done as well.(b) Recording of reasons also operates as a valid restraint on any possible arbitrary exercise of judicial and quasi-judicial or even administrative power.(c) Reasons reassure that discretion has been exercised by the decision­maker on relevant grounds and by disregarding extraneous considerations.(d) Reasons have virtually become as indispensable a component of a decision-­making process as observing principles of natural justice by judicial, quasi­-judicial and even by administrative bodies.(e) The ongoing judicial trend in all countries committed to rule of law and constitutional governance is in favour of reasoned decisions based on relevant facts. This is virtually the lifeblood of judicial decision­-making justifying the principle that reason is the soul of justice.(f) Judicial or even quasi-­judicial opinions these days can be as different as the judges and authorities who deliver them. All these decisions serve one common purpose which is to demonstrate by reason that the relevant factors have been objectively considered. This is important for sustaining the litigants’ faith in the justice delivery system.(g) Insistence on reason is a requirement for both judicial accountability and transparency.(h) If a judge or a quasi­-judicial authority is not candid enough about his/her decision­-making process then it is impossible to know whether the person deciding is faithful to the doctrine of precedent or to principles of incrementalism.(i) Reasons in support of decisions must be cogent, clear and succinct. A pretence of reasons or “rubber­stamp reasons” is not to be equated with a valid decision-­making process.(j) It cannot be doubted that transparency is the sine qua non of restraint on abuse of judicial powers. Transparency in decision­-making not only makes the judges and decision­makers less prone to errors but also makes them subject to broader scrutiny.(k) In all common law jurisdictions judgments play a vital role in setting up precedents for the future. Therefore, for development of law, requirement of giving reasons for the decision is of the essence and is virtually a part of “due process”.Hon’ble Mrs. Justice B.V. Nagarathna has pronounced the reportable judgment of the Bench comprising Hon’ble Mr. Justice L. Nageswara Rao, Hon’ble Mr. Justice B.R. Gavai and Her Ladyship.For Petitioner(s) Mr. Smarhar Singh, AOR Ms. Shweta Kumari, Adv Mr. Ashutosh Thakur, Adv For Respondent(s) Mr. A. Karthik, AOR Mr. Yogsh K. Ahirrao, Adv. Mr. Arsh Khan Adv. Ms. Smrithi Suresh, Adv. Mr. Saaketh Kasibhatla, Adv. Mr. R. Basant, Sr. Adv. Mr. Yogesh K. Ahirrao, Adv. Ms. Astha Prasad, Adv Mr. Ajit Pravin Wagh, AOR Mr. Saket Singh, Adv Mrs. Niranjana Singh, AOR Mr. Manish Kumar, AORBail – While elaborating reasons may not be assigned for grant of bail, at the same time an order de hors reasoning or bereft of the relevant reasons cannot result in grant of bail. It would be only a non speaking order which is an instance of violation of principles of natural justice. In such a case the prosecution or the informant has a right to assail the order before a higher forum.While we are conscious of the fact that liberty of an individual is an invaluable right, at the same time while considering an application for bail Courts cannot lose sight of the serious nature of the accusations against an accused and the facts that have a bearing in the case, particularly, when the accusations may not be false, frivolous or vexatious in nature but are supported by adequate material brought on record so as to enable a Court to arrive at a prima facie conclusion. While considering an application for grant of bail a prima facie conclusion must be supported by reasons and must be arrived at after having regard to the vital facts of the case brought on record. Due consideration must be given to facts suggestive of the nature of crime, the criminal antecedents of the accused, if any, and the nature of punishment that would follow a conviction vis­à­vis the offence/s alleged against an accused.It is not necessary for a Court to give elaborate reasons while granting bail particularly when the case is at the initial stage and the allegations of the offences by the accused would not have been crystalised as such. There cannot be elaborate details recorded to give an impression that the case is one that would result in a conviction or, by contrast, in an acquittal while passing an order on an application for grant of bail. At the same time, a balance would have to be struck between the nature of the allegations made against the accused; severity of the punishment if the allegations are proved beyond reasonable doubt and would result in a conviction; reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being influenced by the accused; tampering of the evidence; the frivolity in the case of the prosecution; criminal antecedents of the accused; and a prima facie satisfaction of the Court in support of the charge against the accused. Ultimately, the Court considering an application for bail has to exercise discretion in a judicious manner and in accordance with the settled principles of law having regard to the crime alleged to be committed by the accused on the one hand and ensuring purity of the trial of the case on the other. [Paras 25 – 28]Penal Code, 1860 – Ss. 341, 307 r/w. 34 – Arms Act, 1959 – S. 27 – Bail – Accused has criminal antecedents – there has been a history of enmity between the accused and the deceased – ­Accused shot with a fire arm, namely, a pistol on two occasions – Accused had absconded for a period of seven months after the complaint in respect of the second offence was lodged against him – Therefore, his arrest was delayed – Accused had threatened the informant mother of the deceased – there is a likelihood of the ­accused absconding or threatening the witnesses if on bail which would have a vital bearing on the trial of the cases – High court has lost sight of the vital aspects of the case and in very cryptic orders has granted bail to the accused – the High Court was not right in allowing the applications for bail filed by the ­accused – Hence, the impugned orders passed by the High Court are set aside. [Para 29]Legal Maxim – “cessante ratione legis cessat ipsa lex” – Meaning – “reason is the soul of the law, and when the reason of any particular law ceases, so does the law itself”.Principles which are to be considered while granting bail(a) While granting bail the court has to keep in mind not only the nature of the accusations, but the severity of the punishment, if the accusation entails a conviction and the nature of evidence in support of the accusations.(b) Reasonable apprehensions of the witnesses being tampered with or the apprehension of there being a threat for the complainant should also weigh with the court in the matter of grant of bail.(c) While it is not expected to have the entire evidence establishing the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt but there ought always to be a prima facie satisfaction of the court in support of the charge.(d) Frivolity in prosecution should always be considered and it is only the element of genuineness that shall have to be considered in the matter of grant of bail, and in the event of there being some doubt as to the genuineness of the prosecution, in the normal course of events, the accused is entitled to an order of bail.”Duty to accord reasons for a decision arrived at by a court – Principles.(a) Insistence on recording of reasons is meant to serve the wider principle of justice that justice must not only be done it must also appear to be done as well.(b) Recording of reasons also operates as a valid restraint on any possible arbitrary exercise of judicial and quasi-judicial or even administrative power.(c) Reasons reassure that discretion has been exercised by the decision­maker on relevant grounds and by disregarding extraneous considerations.(d) Reasons have virtually become as indispensable a component of a decision-­making process as observing principles of natural justice by judicial, quasi­-judicial and even by administrative bodies.(e) The ongoing judicial trend in all countries committed to rule of law and constitutional governance is in favour of reasoned decisions based on relevant facts. This is virtually the lifeblood of judicial decision­-making justifying the principle that reason is the soul of justice.(f) Judicial or even quasi-­judicial opinions these days can be as different as the judges and authorities who deliver them. All these decisions serve one common purpose which is to demonstrate by reason that the relevant factors have been objectively considered. This is important for sustaining the litigants’ faith in the justice delivery system.(g) Insistence on reason is a requirement for both judicial accountability and transparency.(h) If a judge or a quasi­-judicial authority is not candid enough about his/her decision­-making process then it is impossible to know whether the person deciding is faithful to the doctrine of precedent or to principles of incrementalism.(i) Reasons in support of decisions must be cogent, clear and succinct. A pretence of reasons or “rubber­stamp reasons” is not to be equated with a valid decision-­making process.(j) It cannot be doubted that transparency is the sine qua non of restraint on abuse of judicial powers. Transparency in decision­-making not only makes the judges and decision­makers less prone to errors but also makes them subject to broader scrutiny.(k) In all common law jurisdictions judgments play a vital role in setting up precedents for the future. Therefore, for development of law, requirement of giving reasons for the decision is of the essence and is virtually a part of “due process”.Hon’ble Mrs. Justice B.V. Nagarathna has pronounced the reportable judgment of the Bench comprising Hon’ble Mr. Justice L. Nageswara Rao, Hon’ble Mr. Justice B.R. Gavai and Her Ladyship.For Petitioner(s) Mr. Smarhar Singh, AOR Ms. Shweta Kumari, Adv Mr. Ashutosh Thakur, Adv For Respondent(s) Mr. A. Karthik, AOR Mr. Yogsh K. Ahirrao, Adv. Mr. Arsh Khan Adv. Ms. Smrithi Suresh, Adv. Mr. Saaketh Kasibhatla, Adv. Mr. R. Basant, Sr. Adv. Mr. Yogesh K. Ahirrao, Adv. Ms. Astha Prasad, Adv Mr. Ajit Pravin Wagh, AOR Mr. Saket Singh, Adv Mrs. Niranjana Singh, AOR Mr. Manish Kumar, AOR