Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 – Banking Regulation Act, 1949 – S. 35 A – Companies Act, 1956 – Ss. 441, 531 – Fraudulent Preference – Power of the Reserve Bank to give directions – Commencement of winding up by tribunal.A conjoint reading of Ss. 531 and 441(2) of the Companies Act, 1956 prima facie reveals that any transfer of property by or against a company in involuntary winding up, the suspect spell for deemed fraudulent transaction is six months before presentation of the winding up petition. [Para 9.2]When the claim in the Suit is relatable to the embargo by the RBI, it was necessary to implead RBI in the litigation, for getting more clarity on the issue. [Para 8.16]When the legality of the RBI Notification is not under challenge, relief can’t be granted in the Suit without determining its legality. [Para 8.15]It is not necessary for the bank to wait for a direction to be violated, and then launch penal actions against the offenders. But the RBI can also issue directions to ensure that the relevant orders/directions are effectively followed. [Para 8.13]Any direction by the RBI, is compelling and enforceable similarly like the provisions of the RBI Act by its very nature. [Para 8.10]The omission by the RBI to mention any enabling provision, doesn’t change the nature and status of the direction.It is not necessary for RBI to mention a specific provision before issuing directions, for it to have statutory consequences. All that is required is the authority under the law, to issue such direction. [Para 8.9]A conjoint reading of the statutory provisions mentioned above, makes it abundantly clear that for ‘public interest’ the RBI is empowered to issue any directive to any banking institution, and to prohibit alienation of an NBFC’s property. The term ‘Public interest’ has no rigid definition. It has to be understood and interpreted in reference to the context in which it is used. The concept derives its meaning from the statute where it occurs, the transaction involved, the state of society and its needs. [Para 8.7]Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 – Section 9 – “Holder in due course” – Bond Status and Obligation.S. 8 of the Negotiable Instruments Act defines a ‘Holder’ of promissory note as any person who in his own name is entitled to the possession of the note and to recovery of due amount, pursuant to the said note. Under the Indian law a holder, to be a holder in due course, must not only have acquired the bill, note of cheque for valid consideration but should have acquired the cheque without having sufficient cause to believe that any defect existed in the title of the person from whom he derived his title. This condition required that he should act in good faith and with reasonable caution. However, mere failure to prove bona fide or absence of negligence on his part would not negative his claim. But, in a given case it is left to the Court to decide whether the negligence on part of the holder is so gross and extraordinary as to presume that he had sufficient cause to believe that such title was defective. The principles stated above in the context of cheques can be extrapolated for promissory notes as well. Resultantly an obligation has been imposed on the transferee of the promissory notes, to be deemed to be a ‘Holder in due course’, that the notes should have been acquired in good faith; after exercising reasonable care and caution about the holder’s title. [Para 11]Two conditions need to be satisfied before awarding interest. First, that money should be wrongfully withheld from the rightful owners; Second, that there should be equitable considerations for awarding said interest. [Para 12]Case Number : Civil Appeal No. 8 of 2022 (Arising out of SLP (c) No. 6533 of 2020) with Civil Appeal No. 9 of 2022 (Arising Out of SLP (c) No. 2876 of 2021); January 3, 2022