Advocates Act, 1961 – Disciplinary Proceedings – It is the duty of the Bar Council of India / State Bar council to improve its functioning on the disciplinary side.We also do not approve and appreciate the delay on the part of the respective State Bar Council(s) in not disposing the complaint(s) within a period of one year. As per Section 36B of the Advocates Act, the Disciplinary Committee of the State Bar Council have to dispose of the complaint received by it under Section 35 expeditiously and in each case the proceeding shall have to be concluded within a period of one year from the date of the receipt of the complaint or the date of initiation of the proceedings at the instance of the State Bar Council, as the case may be. Failing to dispose the complaint within a period of one year, such complaint is required to be transferred to the Bar Council of India for its disposal as if, it was a proceeding withdrawn for inquiry under subsection (2) of Section 36. Therefore, disposal of a complaint received by the State Bar Council under Section 35 within a period of one year from the date of receipt of such complaint is mandatory and the concerned State Bar Council(s) have to dispose of such complaints as expeditiously and in each case the proceeding shall have to be concluded within a period of one year. Only in an exceptional case, by giving valid reasons to be recorded as to why the complaint could not be disposed of within a period of one year, such complaints are required to be transferred to the Bar Council of India as provided under Section 36B of the Advocates Act. Therefore, the transfer of the complaint(s) received under Section 35 of the Advocates Act from the State Bar Council to the Bar Council of India is an exception. However, for reasons best known to the concerned State Bar Councils, the complaints are not being disposed received by them under Section 35 within one year. This may be because the complaints are filed against the fellow Advocates and they would not like to displease the Advocates against whom the complaints are made. There could also be some valid reasons for not disposing of the complaint(s) within a period of one year. But for the same, the reasons have to be assigned/recorded as to why the complaint(s) could not be disposed of within a period of one year. In many cases, the complaints are deliberately kept pending for more than one year, so that the same shall be transferred to the Bar Council of India as provided under Section 36B of the Advocates Act, by passing the buck so to say.The disciplinary committee of a State Bar Council shall dispose of a complaint received by it under section 35 expeditiously and the proceedings shall be concluded within a period of one year from the date of receipt of the complaint or the date of initiation of the proceedings at the instance of the State Bar Council, as the case may be, failing which, such proceedings shall stand transferred to the Bar Council of India. The object of transfer of such proceedings to the Bar Council of India is an intimation that the State Bar Council has failed to dispose of the complaint within a period of one year as aforesaid. In such circumstance, the Bar Council of India will have to dispose of the same as if it were a proceeding withdrawn for inquiry under sub-section (2) of section 36 of the Act.Sub-section (3) of section 36 of the Advocates Act states that the disciplinary committee of the Bar Council of India in disposing of any case under section 36 shall observe as far as may be the procedure laid down in section 35 the references to the Advocate General in that section be considered as references to the Attorney General of India. Under sub-section (3) of section 35 of the Advocates Act, there is a mandate for the disciplinary committee of a State Bar Council giving notice to the Advocate General and opportunity of being heard before making an order under the said sub-section. Having regard to sub-section (3) of section 36 in respect of a transferred complaint, possibly notice may have to be given to the Attorney General of India before disposing of the complaint as per subsection (2) of section 36 of the Act. Then in such a case the inquiry proceedings would not only become complicated but also delay the entire proceeding.Advocates Act, 1961 – Object and Purpose of enactment of the Advocates Act – Role of Bar Council of India / State Bar Councils as well as the role of lawyers – Discussed.Under the Advocates Act, a duty is cast upon the Bar Council of India/State Bar Councils to safeguard the integrity of the legal profession. It is duty of the Bar Council of India/respective State Bar Councils to ensure the nobility of the legal system at all costs. The powers to conduct disciplinary proceedings against members of the Bar are provided under Sections 35 and 36B of the Advocates Act. The mandate is to dispose of the complaint received under Section 35 and/or Section 36 within a period of one year from the date of receipt of the said complaint and/or from the date of such proceeding to the Bar Council of India. By not disposing of the complaint within the stipulated time provided under the Act would tantamount to failure on their part to perform the duty cast under the Advocates Act. Under the Advocates Act, a duty is cast upon the Bar Council of India/State Bar Councils to safeguard the integrity and nobility of the legal profession.Case Law ReferenceFor Appellant(s) Mr. Goli Ramakrishna, Adv. Mr. Sumanth Nookala, AOR For Respondent(s) Mr. Shishir Pinaki, Adv. Mr. D. Mahesh Babu, AOR Mr. Ardhendumauli Kumar Prasad, AOR Mr. Shashi Shekhar Kumar Prasad, Adv. Mr. Amritesh Raj, Adv. Ma. Sakeena Quidwai, Adv. Ms. Shreya Srivastava, Adv. Mr. Ashish Madaan, Adv.Advocates Act, 1961 – Disciplinary Proceedings – It is the duty of the Bar Council of India / State Bar council to improve its functioning on the disciplinary side.We also do not approve and appreciate the delay on the part of the respective State Bar Council(s) in not disposing the complaint(s) within a period of one year. As per Section 36B of the Advocates Act, the Disciplinary Committee of the State Bar Council have to dispose of the complaint received by it under Section 35 expeditiously and in each case the proceeding shall have to be concluded within a period of one year from the date of the receipt of the complaint or the date of initiation of the proceedings at the instance of the State Bar Council, as the case may be. Failing to dispose the complaint within a period of one year, such complaint is required to be transferred to the Bar Council of India for its disposal as if, it was a proceeding withdrawn for inquiry under subsection (2) of Section 36. Therefore, disposal of a complaint received by the State Bar Council under Section 35 within a period of one year from the date of receipt of such complaint is mandatory and the concerned State Bar Council(s) have to dispose of such complaints as expeditiously and in each case the proceeding shall have to be concluded within a period of one year. Only in an exceptional case, by giving valid reasons to be recorded as to why the complaint could not be disposed of within a period of one year, such complaints are required to be transferred to the Bar Council of India as provided under Section 36B of the Advocates Act. Therefore, the transfer of the complaint(s) received under Section 35 of the Advocates Act from the State Bar Council to the Bar Council of India is an exception. However, for reasons best known to the concerned State Bar Councils, the complaints are not being disposed received by them under Section 35 within one year. This may be because the complaints are filed against the fellow Advocates and they would not like to displease the Advocates against whom the complaints are made. There could also be some valid reasons for not disposing of the complaint(s) within a period of one year. But for the same, the reasons have to be assigned/recorded as to why the complaint(s) could not be disposed of within a period of one year. In many cases, the complaints are deliberately kept pending for more than one year, so that the same shall be transferred to the Bar Council of India as provided under Section 36B of the Advocates Act, by passing the buck so to say.The disciplinary committee of a State Bar Council shall dispose of a complaint received by it under section 35 expeditiously and the proceedings shall be concluded within a period of one year from the date of receipt of the complaint or the date of initiation of the proceedings at the instance of the State Bar Council, as the case may be, failing which, such proceedings shall stand transferred to the Bar Council of India. The object of transfer of such proceedings to the Bar Council of India is an intimation that the State Bar Council has failed to dispose of the complaint within a period of one year as aforesaid. In such circumstance, the Bar Council of India will have to dispose of the same as if it were a proceeding withdrawn for inquiry under sub-section (2) of section 36 of the Act.Sub-section (3) of section 36 of the Advocates Act states that the disciplinary committee of the Bar Council of India in disposing of any case under section 36 shall observe as far as may be the procedure laid down in section 35 the references to the Advocate General in that section be considered as references to the Attorney General of India. Under sub-section (3) of section 35 of the Advocates Act, there is a mandate for the disciplinary committee of a State Bar Council giving notice to the Advocate General and opportunity of being heard before making an order under the said sub-section. Having regard to sub-section (3) of section 36 in respect of a transferred complaint, possibly notice may have to be given to the Attorney General of India before disposing of the complaint as per subsection (2) of section 36 of the Act. Then in such a case the inquiry proceedings would not only become complicated but also delay the entire proceeding.Advocates Act, 1961 – Object and Purpose of enactment of the Advocates Act – Role of Bar Council of India / State Bar Councils as well as the role of lawyers – Discussed.Under the Advocates Act, a duty is cast upon the Bar Council of India/State Bar Councils to safeguard the integrity of the legal profession. It is duty of the Bar Council of India/respective State Bar Councils to ensure the nobility of the legal system at all costs. The powers to conduct disciplinary proceedings against members of the Bar are provided under Sections 35 and 36B of the Advocates Act. The mandate is to dispose of the complaint received under Section 35 and/or Section 36 within a period of one year from the date of receipt of the said complaint and/or from the date of such proceeding to the Bar Council of India. By not disposing of the complaint within the stipulated time provided under the Act would tantamount to failure on their part to perform the duty cast under the Advocates Act. Under the Advocates Act, a duty is cast upon the Bar Council of India/State Bar Councils to safeguard the integrity and nobility of the legal profession.Case Law ReferenceFor Appellant(s) Mr. Goli Ramakrishna, Adv. Mr. Sumanth Nookala, AOR For Respondent(s) Mr. Shishir Pinaki, Adv. Mr. D. Mahesh Babu, AOR Mr. Ardhendumauli Kumar Prasad, AOR Mr. Shashi Shekhar Kumar Prasad, Adv. Mr. Amritesh Raj, Adv. Ma. Sakeena Quidwai, Adv. Ms. Shreya Srivastava, Adv. Mr. Ashish Madaan, Adv.