Fire Incident – Demand of excise duty on the liquor destroyed – Whether the demand in question is authorised by law ? – Whether the company remains liable to pay excise duty on the liquor lost in fire – Control of Department over the distillery and godown – Act of God – Inevitable Accident – Res ipsa loquitur – Insurance coverage only of the value of liquor – Effects of.The present one had not been a case where anything related with the forces of nature like storm, floods, lightning or earthquake had been in operation or caused the fire. When nothing of any external natural force had been in operation in violent or sudden manner, the event of the fire in question could be referable to anything but to an act of God in legal parlance. The observations of High Court in this regard do not appear sound and are required to be disapproved.Summation(i). The demand raised by the appellants against the respondent company, of excise duty on the liquor lost in fire, is authorised by law and has rightly been raised as per the applicable provisions of the Act of 1910, the Excise Manual and the Rules of 1969.(ii). The fire incident in question cannot be said to be that of an event beyond human control and the High Court has been in error in holding that no negligence could be imputed on the respondent company.(iii). The fact that the respondent company had taken insurance coverage only of the value of liquor (and not that of excise duty thereupon) and then, had received the insurance claim towards the value of liquor also operates against the respondent company and fortifies the conclusion about negligence of the respondent company.A. As to whether demand of excise duty on the liquor lost in fire is authorised by law and has rightly been raised as per the applicable provisions of the Act of 1910, the Excise Manual and the Rules of 1969?B. As to whether the fire incident in question had been an event beyond human control and no negligence could be imputed on the respondent company?C. What would be the effect of the fact that the respondent company had taken insurance coverage only of the value of liquor (and not that of excise duty thereupon) and then, had received the insurance claim towards the value of liquor?Case Number : Civil Appeal No(s). 169-170 of 2022 (Arising out of SLP (c) Nos. 11596-11597 of 2020); January 5, 2022Hon’ble Mr. Justice DINESH MAHESHWARI pronounced the reportable judgment of the Bench comprising His Lordship, Hon’ble Mr. Justice A. M. Khanwilkar and Hon’ble Mr. Justice Krishna Murari.For Petitioner(s) Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, ASG Mr. Samar Vijay Singh, AOR Celeste Agarwal, Adv. Prabjot Kaur, Adv. Mr. Vipin Singh Bansal, Adv. Mr. Amit Ojha, Adv. For Respondent(s) Mr. Niraj Gupta, AOR