Prevention of Unfair Labour Practices Act, 1971 – Whether in the facts and circumstances of the case the punishment of dismissal can be said to be an unfair labour practice on the ground that the same was disproportionate to the misconduct proved and therefore the Industrial Court was justified in interfering with the order of dismissal and ordering reinstatement with continuity of service ?Even otherwise in the facts of the case when in the departmental enquiry, it has been specifically found that due to rash and negligent driving on the part of the driver – respondent, the accident took place in which four persons died, when the punishment of dismissal is imposed it cannot be said to be shockingly disproportionate punishment. In the departmental proceedings every aspect 16 has been considered. At the cost of repetition, it is observed that even the Industrial Court has not interfered with the findings recorded by the enquiry officer in the departmental proceedings. Therefore, in the facts and circumstance of the case, the Industrial Court committed a grave error and has exceeded in its jurisdiction while interfering with the order of dismissal passed by the disciplinary authority, which was not interfered by the Labour Court. [Para 11]Labour Law – Disciplinary Proceedings – Industrial Court cannot give much stress on the acquittal of the workman by the criminal court – An acquittal in a criminal trial has no bearing or relevance on the disciplinary proceedings as the standard of proof in both the cases are different and the proceedings operate in different fields and with different objectives.When the respondent was driving the vehicle it met with an accident with the jeep coming from the opposite side and in the said accident four persons died. From the material on record it emerges that the impact of the accident with the jeep coming from the opposite side was such that the jeep was pushed back 25 feet. From the aforesaid facts it can be said that the respondent – workman was driving the vehicle in such a great speed and rashly due to which the accident had occurred in which four persons died. Even while acquitting the accused – respondent – driver who was facing the trial under Sections 279 and 304(a) of IPC Criminal Court observed that the prosecution failed to prove that the incident occurred due to rash and negligent driving of the accused – respondent herein only and none else. Therefore, at the best even if it is assumed that even driver of the jeep was also negligent, it can be said to be a case of contributory negligence. That does not mean that the respondent – workman was not at all negligent. Hence, it does not absolve him of the misconduct.Hon’ble Mr. Justice M.R. Shah pronounced the reportable judgment of the Bench comprising His Lordship and Hon’ble Mrs. Justice B.V. Nagarathna.For Appellant(s) Ms. Mayuri Raghuvanshi, AOR For Respondent(s) Mr. Nishanth Patil, AOR Ms. Malvika Kala, Adv. Ms. Kaveri Rawal, Adv.