Consumer Protection Act, 2019 – Ss. 35 (1) r/w. 2 (5) – A complaint may be filed: (i) by a single consumer; (ii) by a recognised consumer Association; (iii) by one or more consumers jointly, seeking the redressal of their own grievances without representing other consumers who may or may not have the same interest; (iv) by one or more consumers on behalf of or for the benefit of numerous consumers; and (v) the Central Government, Central Authority or State Authority. [Para 38]Consumer Law – Since “sameness of interest” is the pre­requisite for an application under Order I Rule 8, CPC read with Section 35(1)(c) of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, it is necessary to include in the consumer complaint, sufficient averments that would show sameness of interest.Consumer Protection Act, 2019 – A complaint filed under Section 35(1)(c) could either be “on behalf of” or “for the benefit of” all consumers having the same interest.Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 – Order I Rule 8 – One person may sue or defend on behalf of all in same interest – Representative Capacity.Salient features of the stipulations contained in Order I Rule 8 CPC(i) where there are numerous persons having the same interest in one suit, one or more of such persons may, with the permission of the Court, sue on behalf of or for the benefit of all persons so interested;(ii) where there are numerous persons having the same interest in one suit, one or more of such persons may be sued or one or more such persons may defend such suit, on behalf of or for the benefit of all persons so interested;(iii) the Court itself may, without the plaintiffs or defendants seeking any permission under Order I Rule 8(1)(a), direct that one or more such persons may sue or be sued or may defend the suit on behalf of and for the benefit of all persons interested;(iv) notice of the institution of the suit to all persons so interested either by personal service or by public advertisement should be ordered by the Court in both categories of cases, namely, where permission is given by the Court on the application of the individuals or direction is issued by the Court itself;(v) any person on whose behalf or for whose benefit the suit is instituted or defended may seek to be made a party to the suit;(vi) abandonment of the whole or part of the claim, withdrawal of the suit or the recording of any agreement, compromise or satisfaction shall not be allowed by the Court unless notice to all persons interested in the matter is issued either by personal service or by public advertisement.(vii) the Court may at any time substitute the person suing or defending in a representative capacity, with any other person, if the former was not prosecuting the suit or defence with due diligence.(viii) the decree passed in the suit covered by this Rule will be binding on all persons.Hon’ble Mr. Justice V. Ramasubramanian pronounced the reportable Judgment of the Bench comprising Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hemant Gupta and His Lordship.For Appellant(s) Mr. Jayant Bhushan, Sr. Adv. Mr. Mayank Mishra, Adv. Mr. Sarvesh Singh Baghel, AOR Ms. Ayshwarya Chandra, Adv. Mr. Aman Chaudhary, Adv. For Respondent(s) Mr. Ajit Kumar Sinha, Sr. Adv. Mr. Govind Jee, Adv. Mr. Krishna Kumar Singh, AOR Mr. Omanakuttan K. K., AORConsumer Protection Act, 2019 – Ss. 35 (1) r/w. 2 (5) – A complaint may be filed: (i) by a single consumer; (ii) by a recognised consumer Association; (iii) by one or more consumers jointly, seeking the redressal of their own grievances without representing other consumers who may or may not have the same interest; (iv) by one or more consumers on behalf of or for the benefit of numerous consumers; and (v) the Central Government, Central Authority or State Authority. [Para 38]Consumer Law – Since “sameness of interest” is the pre­requisite for an application under Order I Rule 8, CPC read with Section 35(1)(c) of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, it is necessary to include in the consumer complaint, sufficient averments that would show sameness of interest.Consumer Protection Act, 2019 – A complaint filed under Section 35(1)(c) could either be “on behalf of” or “for the benefit of” all consumers having the same interest.Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 – Order I Rule 8 – One person may sue or defend on behalf of all in same interest – Representative Capacity.Salient features of the stipulations contained in Order I Rule 8 CPC(i) where there are numerous persons having the same interest in one suit, one or more of such persons may, with the permission of the Court, sue on behalf of or for the benefit of all persons so interested;(ii) where there are numerous persons having the same interest in one suit, one or more of such persons may be sued or one or more such persons may defend such suit, on behalf of or for the benefit of all persons so interested;(iii) the Court itself may, without the plaintiffs or defendants seeking any permission under Order I Rule 8(1)(a), direct that one or more such persons may sue or be sued or may defend the suit on behalf of and for the benefit of all persons interested;(iv) notice of the institution of the suit to all persons so interested either by personal service or by public advertisement should be ordered by the Court in both categories of cases, namely, where permission is given by the Court on the application of the individuals or direction is issued by the Court itself;(v) any person on whose behalf or for whose benefit the suit is instituted or defended may seek to be made a party to the suit;(vi) abandonment of the whole or part of the claim, withdrawal of the suit or the recording of any agreement, compromise or satisfaction shall not be allowed by the Court unless notice to all persons interested in the matter is issued either by personal service or by public advertisement.(vii) the Court may at any time substitute the person suing or defending in a representative capacity, with any other person, if the former was not prosecuting the suit or defence with due diligence.(viii) the decree passed in the suit covered by this Rule will be binding on all persons.Hon’ble Mr. Justice V. Ramasubramanian pronounced the reportable Judgment of the Bench comprising Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hemant Gupta and His Lordship.For Appellant(s) Mr. Jayant Bhushan, Sr. Adv. Mr. Mayank Mishra, Adv. Mr. Sarvesh Singh Baghel, AOR Ms. Ayshwarya Chandra, Adv. Mr. Aman Chaudhary, Adv. For Respondent(s) Mr. Ajit Kumar Sinha, Sr. Adv. Mr. Govind Jee, Adv. Mr. Krishna Kumar Singh, AOR Mr. Omanakuttan K. K., AOR